CHAPTER  II 
OVERVIEW OF THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD 
Here is the abstract of a 2014 article in the journal Psychological Science. 
Taking notes on laptops r ather than in long hand is incr easingly common. Many researchers have 
suggested tha t laptop note taking is less ef fective than long hand note taking f or le arning. Prior 
studies have primarily focused on studen ts’ capacity for multi tasking and distr action when using 
laptops. The pr esent research suggests that even when laptops ar e used solely to tak e notes, the y 
may still be impairing le arning because their use r esults in shallo wer processing. In three studies, 
we found that students who took notes on laptops perf ormed worse on conceptual questions than 
students who took notes long hand. We sho w tha t wher eas taking mor e notes c an be beneficial, 
laptop note takers’ tendency to transcribe lectures verbatim rather than processing information and 
reframing it in their own words is detrimental to learning. (Mueler & Oppenheimer, 2014, p. 1159)1 
In this abstr act, the r esearcher has iden tified a r esearch question—about the ef fect of taking notes on a 
laptop on le arning—and iden tified wh y i t is w orthy o f in vestigation—because the pr actice is ubiqui tous 
and ma y be harmful to le arning. I n this chapter , w e g ive y ou a br oad o verview o f the v arious stag es o f 
the research process. These include finding a topic o f investigation, reviewing the literature, refining your 
research question and g enerating a h ypothesis, designing and c onducting a stud y, anal yzing the da ta, 
coming to conclusions, and reporting the results. 
Notes 
1. Mueller, P. A., & Oppenheimer, D. M. (2014). The pen is mightier than the keyboard: Advantages of longhand over 
laptop note taking. Psychological Science, 25(6), 1159-1168. 
Overview of the Scientific Method  |  237.  A Model of Scientific Research in Psychology 
Learning Objectives 
1. Review a general model of scientific research in psychology. 
 
Figure 2.1 presents a simple model of scientific research in psychology. The researchers formulate a research 
question, c onduct an empiric al stud y designe d to answ er the question, anal yze the r esulting da ta, dr aw 
conclusions about the answ er to the question, and publishes the r esults so tha t they become part of the 
research literature (i.e., all the published research in that field). Because the research literature is one of the 
primary sources of new research questions, this process can be thought of as a cycle. New research leads to 
new questions, which lead to new research, and so on. Figure 2.1 also indicates that research questions can 
originate outside of this cycle either with informal observations or with practical problems that need to be 
solved. But even in these cases, the researcher would start by checking the research literature to see if the 
question had already been answered and to refine it based on what previous research had already found. 
 
Figure 2.1 A Simple Model of Scientific Research in Psychology 
A Model of Scientific Research in Psychology  |  25Reading in print? Scan this QR code 
to view the video on your mobile 
device. Or go to youtu.be/
XToWVxS_9lA 
The research by Mehl and his colleagues is described nicely by this model. Their research question—whether 
women are more talkative than men— was suggested to them both b y people’s stereotypes and b y claims 
published in the research literature about the relative talkativeness of women and men. When they checked 
the r esearch li terature, ho wever, the y f ound tha t this question had not be en ade quately addr essed in 
scientific studies. The y then c onducted a c areful empirical study, analyzed the r esults (finding very little 
difference between women and men), formed their conclusions, and published their work so that it became 
part o f the r esearch li terature. The public ation o f their ar ticle is not the end o f the stor y, ho wever, 
because their work suggests many new questions (about the reliability of the result, about potential cultural 
differences, etc.) that will likely be taken up by them and by other researchers inspired by their work. 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: 
https://kpu.pressbooks.pub/psychmethods4e/?p=32#oembed-1 
As another e xample, c onsider tha t as c ell phones be came mor e 
widespread during the 1990s, pe ople began to w onder whether, and to 
what e xtent, c ell phone use had a nega tive ef fect on driving. Man y 
psychologists de cided to tackle this question scien tifically (e.g., Colle t, 
Guillot, & P etit, 2010)1. It was cle ar from previously published research 
that engag ing in a simple v erbal task impairs perf ormance on a 
perceptual or motor task c arried out a t the same time, but no one had 
studied the ef fect spe cifically o f c ell phone use on driving. Under 
carefully c ontrolled c onditions, these r esearchers c ompared pe ople’s 
driving perf ormance while using a c ell phone wi th their perf ormance 
while not using a cell phone, both in the lab and on the r oad. They found 
that people’s ability to de tect road hazards, reaction time, and main tain 
control of the vehicle were all impaired by cell phone use. Each new study 
was published and became part of the growing research literature on this 
topic. For instance, other research teams subsequently demonstrated that cell phone conversations carry a 
greater risk than conversations with a passenger who is aware of driving conditions, which often become a 
point of conversation (e.g., Drews, Pasupathi, & Strayer, 2004)2. 
Video Attributions 
• “Understanding driver distraction” by American Psychological Association. Standard YouTube Licence. 
26  |  A Model of Scientific Research in PsychologyNotes 
1. Collet, C., Guillot, A., & Petit, C. (2010). Phoning while driving I: A review of epidemiological, psychological, behavioral 
and physiological studies. Ergonomics, 53, 589–601. 
2. Drews, F. A., Pasupathi, M., & Strayer, D. L. (2004). Passenger and cell-phone conversations in simulated driving. 
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 48, 2210–2212. 
A Model of Scientific Research in Psychology  |  278.  Finding a Research Topic 
Learning Objectives 
1. Learn some common sources of research ideas. 
2. Define the research literature in psychology and give examples of sources that are part of the research 
literature and sources that are not. 
3. Describe and use several methods for finding previous research on a particular research idea or question. 
 
Good research must beg in with a good research question. Yet coming up wi th good research questions is 
something that novice researchers often find dif ficult and str essful. One r eason is tha t this is a cr eative 
process tha t c an appe ar m ysterious—even mag ical—with e xperienced r esearchers se eming to pull 
interesting r esearch questions out o f thin air . H owever, psy chological r esearch on cr eativity has sho wn 
that it is nei ther as m ysterious nor as mag ical as i t appears. It is lar gely the pr oduct of ordinary thinking 
strategies and persistenc e (Weisberg, 1993)1. This se ction covers some fair ly simple str ategies for finding 
general r esearch ide as, turning those ide as in to empiric ally testable r esearch questions, and finall y 
evaluating those questions in terms of how interesting they are and how feasible they would be to answer. 
Finding Inspiration 
Research questions o ften beg in as mor e g eneral r esearch ide as—usually f ocusing on some beha vior or 
psychological characteristic: talkativeness, learning, depression, bungee jumping, and so on. Before looking 
at how to turn such ide as into empirically testable r esearch questions, i t is w orth looking a t where such 
ideas c ome fr om in the first plac e. Thr ee o f the most c ommon sour ces o f inspir ation ar e inf ormal 
observations, practical problems, and previous research. 
Informal observations include dir ect observations of our o wn and others’ beha vior as w ell as se condhand 
observations from non-scientific sources such as ne wspapers, books, blogs, and so on. F or example, you 
might notic e tha t y ou al ways se em to be in the slo west mo ving line a t the gr ocery stor e. Could i t be 
that most pe ople think the same thing ? Or y ou mig ht r ead in a loc al ne wspaper about pe ople dona ting 
money and f ood to a loc al family whose house has burne d down and beg in to w onder about who mak es 
such donations and wh y. Some o f the most famous r esearch in psy chology has be en inspired by informal 
observations. Stanley Milgram’s famous r esearch on obe dience to a uthority, for example, was inspired in 
part by journalistic r eports of the trials o f accused Nazi war criminals—many of whom claime d that they 
28  |  Finding a Research Topicwere only obeying orders. This led him to w onder about the e xtent to which or dinary people will commit 
immoral acts simply because they are ordered to do so by an authority figure (Milgram, 1963)2. 
Practical problems can also inspire research ideas, leading directly to applied research in such domains as 
law, health, education, and sports. Does taking lecture notes by hand improve students’ exam performance? 
How effective is psy chotherapy for depression compared to drug ther apy? To what extent do c ell phones 
impair people’s driving ability? How can we teach children to read more efficiently? What is the best mental 
preparation for running a marathon? 
Probably the most c ommon inspiration for new research ideas, however, is pr evious research. Recall that 
science is a kind o f large-scale collaboration in which man y different researchers read and e valuate each 
other’s work and conduct new studies to build on i t. Of course, experienced researchers are familiar wi th 
previous r esearch in their ar ea o f e xpertise and pr obably ha ve a long list o f ide as. This sugg ests tha t 
novice researchers can find inspiration by consulting with a more experienced researcher (e.g., students can 
consult a faculty member). But they can also find inspiration by picking up a copy of almost any professional 
journal and r eading the ti tles and abstr acts. In one t ypical issue o f Psychological Science, for example, you 
can find articles on the perception of shapes, anti-Semitism, police lineups, the meaning of death, second-
language le arning, pe ople who se ek nega tive emotional e xperiences, and man y other topics.  If y ou c an 
narrow your interests down to a par ticular topic (e.g., memory) or domain ( e.g., health care), you can also 
look through more specific journals, such as Memory & Cognition or Health Psychology. 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: 
https://kpu.pressbooks.pub/psychmethods4e/?p=34#oembed-1 
Finding a Research Topic  |  29Reading in print? Scan this QR code 
to view the video on your mobile 
device. Or go to https://youtu.be/
nXNztCLYgxc 
Reviewing the Research Literature 
Once again, one o f the most c ommon sources of inspiration is pr evious 
research. Therefore, it is impor tant to r eview the li terature early in the 
research process. The research literature in any field is all the published 
research in tha t field. R eviewing the r esearch li terature means finding, 
reading, and summarizing the publishe d research relevant to your topic 
of interest. In addition to helping y ou discover new research questions, 
reviewing the li terature e arly in the r esearch pr ocess c an help y ou in 
several other ways. 
• It can tell you if a research question has already been answered. 
• It can help you evaluate the interestingness of a research question. 
• It can give you ideas for how to conduct your own study. 
• It can tell you how your study fits into the research literature. 
The research literature in psychology is enormous—including millions of scholarly articles and books dating 
to the beg inning of the field—and i t continues to gr ow. Although its boundaries ar e somewhat fuzzy, the 
research li terature defini tely does  not include self-help and other pop psy chology books, dic tionary and 
encyclopedia entries, websites, and similar sour ces that are intended mainly for the general public. These 
are c onsidered unr eliable be cause the y ar e not r eviewed b y other r esearchers and ar e o ften base d on 
little more than common sense or personal experience. Wikipedia contains much valuable information, but 
because its authors are anonymous and may not have any formal training or expertise in that subject area, 
and its content continually changes it is unsuitable as a basis of sound scientific research. For our purposes, 
it helps to define the r esearch literature as c onsisting almost en tirely of two types of sources: articles in 
professional journals, and scholarly books in psychology and related fields. 
Professional Journals 
Professional journals are periodic als tha t publish orig inal r esearch ar ticles. Ther e ar e thousands o f 
professional journals tha t publish r esearch in psy chology and r elated fields. The y ar e usuall y publishe d 
monthly or quarterly in individual issues, e ach of which contains several articles. The issues ar e organized 
into volumes, which usually consist of all the issues for a calendar year. Some journals are published in hard 
copy only, others in both hard copy and electronic form, and still others in electronic form only. 
Most ar ticles in pr ofessional journals ar e one o f t wo basic t ypes: empiric al r esearch r eports and r eview 
articles. Empirical research reports describe one or more new empirical studies conducted by the authors. 
They introduce a research question, explain why it is interesting, review previous research, describe their 
method and results, and draw their conclusions. Review articles summarize previously published research 
on a topic and usually present new ways to organize or explain the results. When a review article is devoted 
30  |  Finding a Research Topicprimarily to presenting a new theory, it is often referred to as a theoretical article. When a review article 
provides a statistical summary of all of the previous results it is referred to as a meta-analysis. 
 
Figure 2.2 Small Sample of the Thousands of Professional Journals That 
Publish Research in Psychology and Related Fields 
Most pr ofessional journals in psy chology under go a pr ocess o f double-blind peer  review. R esearchers 
who w ant to publish their w ork in the journal submi t a manuscript to the e ditor—who is g enerally an 
established researcher too—who in turn sends i t to two or three experts on the topic. Each r eviewer reads 
the manuscript, wri tes a cri tical but c onstructive review, and sends the r eview back to the e ditor along 
with recommendations about whether the manuscript should be published or not. The editor then decides 
whether to accept the article for publication, ask the a uthors to make changes and resubmit it for further 
consideration, or r eject i t outrig ht. In any case, the e ditor forwards the r eviewers’ wri tten comments to 
the researchers so tha t they can revise their manuscript ac cordingly. This en tire process is double-blind, 
as the reviewers do not kno w the identity of the researcher(s) and vice versa. Double-blind peer review is 
helpful because it ensures that the work meets basic standards of the field before it can enter the research 
literature. However, in order to increase transparency and accountability, some newer open access journals 
Finding a Research Topic  |  31(e.g., Frontiers in P sychology) utilize an open pe er review process wherein the iden tities of the r eviewers 
(which remain concealed during the peer review process) are published alongside the journal article. 
Scholarly Books 
Scholarly books are books written by researchers and practitioners mainly for use by other researchers and 
practitioners. A monograph is written by a sing le author or a small gr oup of authors and usuall y, g ives a 
coherent presentation of a topic much lik e an extended review article. Edited volumes have an editor or a 
small group of editors who recruit many authors to write separate chapters on different aspects of the same 
topic. Although edited volumes can also give a coherent presentation of the topic, it is not unusual for each 
chapter to take a different perspective or even for the authors of different chapters to openly disagree with 
each other. In general, scholarly books undergo a peer review process similar to tha t used by professional 
journals. 
Literature Search Strategies 
Using PsycINFO and Other Databases 
The primary method used to search the research literature involves using one or more electronic databases. 
These include Ac ademic Se arch Pr emier, JSTO R, and Pr oQuest f or all ac ademic disciplines, ERI C f or 
education, and Pub Med f or me dicine and r elated fields. The most impor tant f or our purposes, ho wever, 
is P sycINFO, which is pr oduced b y the Americ an P sychological Associa tion ( APA). PsycINFO is so 
comprehensive—covering thousands of professional journals and scholarly books going back more than 100 
years—that for most purposes i ts content is synon ymous with the r esearch literature in psy chology. Like 
most such databases, PsycINFO is usually available through your university library. 
PsycINFO consists of individual records for each article, book chapter, or book in the database. Each record 
includes basic publication information, an abstract or summar y of the work (like the one pr esented at the 
start of this chapter ), and a list o f other w orks ci ted by that work. A c omputer interface allows entering 
one or more search terms and r eturns any records that contain those se arch terms. (These in terfaces are 
provided b y dif ferent v endors and ther efore c an look some what dif ferent depending on the li brary y ou 
use.) Each r ecord also c ontains lists o f keywords that describe the c ontent of the w ork and also a list o f 
index terms. The index terms are especially helpful because they are standardized. Research on differences 
between females and males, f or example, is al ways indexed under “H uman Sex Differences.” Research on 
note-taking is al ways inde xed under the term “Le arning S trategies.” If you do not kno w the appr opriate 
index terms, PsycINFO includes a thesaurus that can help you find them. 
Given that there are nearly four million records in PsycINFO, you may have to try a variety of search terms 
in dif ferent c ombinations and a t dif ferent le vels o f spe cificity bef ore y ou find wha t y ou ar e looking f or. 
32  |  Finding a Research TopicQR code that links to 
PsycINFO video 
Reading in print? Scan this 
QR code to view the video 
on your mobile device. Or 
go to https://youtu.be/
fhhctbaVXvk 
Imagine, for example, that you are interested in the question o f whether males and females differ in terms 
of their ability to recall experiences from when they were very young. If you were to enter the search term 
“memory,” it would return far too man y records to look thr ough individually. This is wher e the thesa urus 
helps. Entering “memory” into the thesa urus provides several more specific index terms—one o f which is 
“early memories.” W hile searching for “early memories” among the inde x terms still r eturns too man y to 
look through individually—combining it with “human sex differences” as a second search term returns fewer 
articles, many of which are highly relevant to the topic. 
Depending on the v endor that provides the in terface to P sycINFO, you may be able to sa ve, print, or e-
mail the r elevant PsycINFO records. The r ecords might even contain links to full-te xt copies of the works 
themselves. (PsycARTICLES is a database that provides full-text access to articles in all journals published by 
the APA.) If not, and you want a copy of the work, you will have to find out if your library carries the journal 
or has the book and the hard copy on the library shelves. Be sure to ask a librarian if you need help. 
 
https://youtu.be/fhhctbaVXvk 
 
Using Other Search Techniques 
In addition to entering search terms into PsycINFO and other databases, there are several other techniques 
you can use to se arch the r esearch literature. First, if y ou have one g ood article or book chapter on y our 
topic—a r ecent r eview ar ticle is best— you c an look thr ough the r eference list o f tha t ar ticle f or other 
relevant ar ticles, books, and book chapters. I n fact, you should do this wi th any relevant ar ticle or book 
chapter you find. You can also star t with a classic ar ticle or book chapter on y our topic, find i ts record in 
PsycINFO (by entering the a uthor’s name or ar ticle’s ti tle as a se arch term), and link fr om there to a list 
of other w orks in P sycINFO tha t ci te tha t classic ar ticle. This w orks be cause other r esearchers working 
on your topic ar e likely to be a ware of the classic ar ticle and ci te it in their o wn work. You can also do a 
general Internet search using search terms related to your topic or the name of a researcher who conducts 
research on your topic. This mig ht lead you directly to works that are part of the research literature (e.g., 
articles in open-access journals or posted on researchers’ own websites). The search engine Google Scholar 
is especially useful for this purpose. A g eneral Internet search might also lead you to websites that are not 
part of the research literature but might provide references to works that are. Finally, you can talk to people 
(e.g., your instructor or other facult y members in psy chology) who kno w something about y our topic and 
can suggest relevant articles and book chapters. 
 
Finding a Research Topic  |  33Reading in print? Scan this QR code 
to view the video on your mobile 
device. Or go to https://youtu.be/
t1ZwgDeX2eQ 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: 
https://kpu.pressbooks.pub/psychmethods4e/?p=34#oembed-2 
What to Search For 
When y ou do a li terature r eview, y ou ne ed to be sele ctive. N ot e very 
article, book chapter , and book tha t r elates to y our r esearch ide a or 
question will be w orth obtaining, r eading, and in tegrating in to y our 
review. Instead, you want to focus on sources that help you do four basic 
things: (a) refine your research question, (b) identify appropriate research 
methods, (c) place your research in the context of previous research, and 
(d) wri te an ef fective research report. Several basic principles c an help 
you find the most useful sources. 
First, i t is best to f ocus on r ecent research, keeping in mind tha t what 
counts as recent depends on the topic. For newer topics that are actively 
being studied, “recent” might mean published in the past year or two. For 
older topics tha t are receiving less a ttention rig ht now, “recent” mig ht 
mean within the past 10 years. You will get a feel for what counts as recent 
for your topic when you start your literature search. A good general rule, however, is to start with sources 
published in the past five years. The main exception to this rule would be classic articles that turn up in the 
reference list o f ne arly e very other sour ce. I f other r esearchers think tha t this w ork is impor tant, e ven 
though it is old, then, by all means, you should include it in your review. 
Second, you should look f or review articles on y our topic be cause they will pr ovide a useful o verview of 
it—often discussing impor tant defini tions, results, theories, trends, and c ontroversies—giving you a g ood 
sense o f wher e y our o wn r esearch fi ts in to the li terature. You should also look f or empiric al r esearch 
reports addr essing y our question or similar questions, which c an g ive y ou ide as about ho w to me asure 
your variables and c ollect your data. As a g eneral rule, i t is g ood to use me thods that others ha ve already 
used successfully unless y ou have good reasons not to. F inally, you should look f or sources that provide 
information tha t c an help y ou ar gue f or the in terestingness o f y our r esearch question. F or a stud y on 
the ef fects o f c ell phone use on driving abili ty, f or e xample, y ou mig ht look f or inf ormation about ho w 
widespread cell phone use is, how frequent and costly motor vehicle crashes are, and so on. 
How many sources are enough for your literature review? This is a dif ficult question be cause it depends 
on how extensively your topic has been studied and also on your own goals. One study found that across a 
variety of professional journals in psychology, the average number of sources cited per article was about 50 
(Adair & Vohra, 2003)3. This gives a rough idea of what professional researchers consider to be adequate. As 
a student, you might be assigned a much lower minimum number of references to include, but the principles 
for selecting the most useful ones remain the same. 
34  |  Finding a Research TopicVideo Attributions 
• “How to Develop a Good Research Topic” by KStateLibraries. CC BY (Attribution) 
• “Sample PsycINFO Search on EBSCOhost” by APA Publishing Training. Standard YouTube Licence. 
• “Using Google Scholar (CLIP)” by clipinfolit. CC BY (Attribution) 
Notes 
1. Weisberg, R. W. (1993). Creativity: Beyond the myth of genius. New York, NY: Freeman. 
2. Milgram, S. (1963). Behavioral study of obedience. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 67, 371–378. 
3. Adair, J. G., & Vohra, N. (2003). The explosion of knowledge, references, and citations: Psychology’s unique response to 
a crisis. American Psychologist, 58, 15–23. 
Finding a Research Topic  |  359.  Generating Good Research Questions 
Learning Objectives 
1. Describe some techniques for turning research ideas into empirical research questions and use those 
techniques to generate questions. 
2. Explain what makes a research question interesting and evaluate research questions in terms of their 
interestingness. 
Generating Empirically Testable Research Questions 
Once you have a r esearch idea, you need to use i t to g enerate one or mor e empirically testable r esearch 
questions, that is, questions e xpressed in terms o f a sing le variable or relationship between variables. One 
way to do this is to look closel y at the discussion se ction in a r ecent research article on the topic. This is 
the last major section of the article, in which the researchers summarize their results, interpret them in the 
context of past research, and suggest directions for future research. These suggestions often take the form 
of specific research questions, which y ou can then tr y to answ er with additional research. This c an be a 
good strategy because it is lik ely that the sugg ested questions ha ve already been identified as in teresting 
and important by experienced researchers. 
But y ou ma y also w ant to g enerate y our o wn r esearch questions. H ow c an y ou do this? F irst, if y ou 
have a par ticular beha vior or psy chological char acteristic in mind, y ou c an simpl y c onceptualize i t as a 
variable and ask how frequent or intense it is. How many words on average do people speak per day? How 
accurate are our memories o f traumatic events? What percentage of people have sought professional help 
for depression? If the question has never been studied scientifically—which is something that you will learn 
when you conduct your literature review—then it might be interesting and worth pursuing. 
If scien tific r esearch has alr eady answ ered the question o f ho w fr equent or in tense the beha vior or 
characteristic is, then y ou should c onsider turning i t in to a question about a r elationship be tween tha t 
behavior or characteristic and some other variable. One way to do this is to ask yourself the following series 
of more general questions and write down all the answers you can think of. 
• What are some possible causes of the behavior or characteristic? 
• What are some possible effects of the behavior or characteristic? 
• What types of people might exhibit more or less of the behavior or characteristic? 
• What types of situations might elicit more or less of the behavior or characteristic? 
36  |  Generating Good Research QuestionsIn general, each answer you write down can be conceptualized as a second variable, suggesting a question 
about a r elationship. I f y ou w ere in terested in talka tiveness, f or e xample, i t mig ht oc cur to y ou tha t a 
possible cause of this psychological characteristic is family size. Is there a relationship between family size 
and talkativeness? Or it might occur to you that people seem to be more talkative in same-sex groups than 
mixed-sex groups. Is there a dif ference in the a verage level of talkativeness of people in same-se x groups 
and people in mix ed-sex groups? This appr oach should allo w you to g enerate many different empirically 
testable questions about almost any behavior or psychological characteristic. 
If through this pr ocess you generate a question tha t has ne ver been studied scientifically—which again is 
something that you will learn in your literature review—then it might be interesting and worth pursuing. But 
what if y ou find tha t it has been studied scientifically? Although novice researchers often want to g ive up 
and move on to a ne w question at this point, this is not ne cessarily a good strategy. For one thing, the fac t 
that the question has be en studied scientifically and the r esearch published suggests that it is o f interest 
to the scien tific community. For another, the question c an almost c ertainly be r efined so tha t its answer 
will still contribute something new to the research literature. Again, asking yourself a series of more general 
questions about the relationship is a good strategy. 
• Are there other ways to define and measure the variables? 
• Are there types of people for whom the relationship might be stronger or weaker? 
• Are there situations in which the relationship might be stronger or weaker—including situations with 
practical importance? 
For e xample, r esearch has sho wn tha t w omen and men spe ak about the same number o f w ords per 
day—but this was when talkativeness was measured in terms of the number of words spoken per day among 
university studen ts in the Uni ted S tates and M exico. We c an still ask whe ther other w ays o f me asuring 
talkativeness—perhaps the number of different people spoken to each day—produce the same result. Or we 
can ask whether studying elderly people or people from other cultures produces the same result. Again, this 
approach should help you generate many different research questions about almost any relationship. 
Evaluating Research Questions 
Researchers usually generate many more research questions than they ever attempt to answer. This means 
they must ha ve some w ay o f e valuating the r esearch questions the y g enerate so tha t the y c an choose 
which ones to pursue. I n this se ction, w e c onsider t wo cri teria f or e valuating r esearch questions: the 
interestingness of the question and the feasibility of answering it. 
Interestingness 
How often do pe ople tie their shoes? Do pe ople feel pain when y ou punch them in the ja w? Are women 
more likely to wear makeup than men? Do people prefer vanilla or chocolate ice cream? Although it would 
Generating Good Research Questions  |  37be a fairly simple matter to design a stud y and collect data to answer these questions, you probably would 
not want to be cause they are not in teresting. We are not talking her e about whe ther a r esearch question 
is interesting to us personall y but whether it is interesting to people more generally and, especially, to the 
scientific community. But what makes a research question interesting in this sense? Here we look at three 
factors that affect the interestingness of a research question: the answer is in doubt, the answer fills a gap 
in the research literature, and the answer has important practical implications. 
First, a research question is in teresting to the e xtent that its answer is in doubt. Ob viously, questions that 
have been answered by scientific research are no longer interesting as the subject of new empirical research. 
But the fac t tha t a question has not be en answ ered b y scien tific r esearch does not ne cessarily mak e i t 
interesting. There has to be some reasonable chance that the answer to the question will be something that 
we did not already know. But how can you assess this before actually collecting data? One approach is to try 
to think of reasons to expect different answers to the question—espe cially ones that seem to conflict with 
common sense. If you can think of reasons to expect at least two different answers, then the question might 
be interesting. If you can think of reasons to expect only one answer, then it probably is not. The question 
of whether women are more talkative than men is in teresting because there are reasons to e xpect both 
answers. The existence of the stereotype itself suggests the answer could be yes, but the fact that women’s 
and men’s verbal abilities are fairly similar suggests the answer could be no. The question of whether people 
feel pain when you punch them in the ja w is not interesting because there is absolutely no reason to think 
that the answer could be anything other than a resounding yes. 
A se cond impor tant fac tor to c onsider when de ciding if a r esearch question is in teresting is whe ther 
answering i t will fill a gap in the r esearch li terature. Again, this me ans in par t that the question has not 
already been answered by scientific research. But it also means that the question is in some sense a natural 
one for people who ar e familiar wi th the r esearch literature. For example, the question o f whether taking 
lecture notes by hand can help improve students’ exam performance would be likely to occur to anyone who 
was familiar with research on note taking and the ineffectiveness of shallow processing on learning. 
A final factor to consider when deciding whether a research question is interesting is whether its answer has 
important practical implications. Again, the question of whether taking notes by hand improves learning has 
important implications for education, including classroom policies concerning technology use. The question 
of whe ther c ell phone use impairs driving is in teresting be cause i t is r elevant to the personal saf ety o f 
everyone who travels by car and to the debate over whether cell phone use should be restricted by law. 
Feasibility 
A second important criterion for evaluating research questions is the feasibility of successfully answering 
them. Ther e ar e man y fac tors tha t af fect f easibility, including time, mone y, e quipment and ma terials, 
technical knowledge and skill, and ac cess to research participants. Clearly, researchers need to take these 
factors into account so that they do not waste time and effort pursuing research that they cannot complete 
successfully. 
Looking thr ough a sample o f pr ofessional journals in psy chology will r eveal man y studies tha t ar e 
38  |  Generating Good Research Questionscomplicated and difficult to carry out. These include longitudinal designs in which participants are tracked 
over many years, neuroimaging studies in which par ticipants’ brain activity is me asured while the y carry 
out various mental tasks, and complex non-experimental studies involving several variables and complicated 
statistical analyses. Keep in mind, thoug h, that such r esearch tends to be c arried out b y teams of hig hly 
trained researchers whose w ork is o ften supported in par t by government and priv ate grants. Also, k eep 
in mind tha t research does not ha ve to be c omplicated or dif ficult to pr oduce interesting and impor tant 
results. Looking through a sample o f professional journals will also r eveal studies that are relatively simple 
and easy to c arry out—perhaps involving a c onvenience sample o f university students and a paper -and-
pencil task. 
A final poin t her e is tha t i t is g enerally g ood pr actice to use me thods tha t ha ve alr eady be en use d 
successfully by other researchers. For example, if you want to manipulate people’s moods to make some of 
them happy, it would be a g ood idea to use one o f the many approaches that have been used successfully 
by other researchers (e.g., paying them a compliment). This is good not only for the sake of feasibility—the 
approach is “trie d and true ”—but also be cause it provides greater continuity with previous research. This 
makes it easier to compare your results with those of other researchers and to understand the implications 
of their research for yours, and vice versa. 
Generating Good Research Questions  |  3910.  Developing a Hypothesis 
Learning Objectives 
1. Distinguish between a theory and a hypothesis. 
2. Discover how theories are used to generate hypotheses and how the results of studies can be used to 
further inform theories. 
3. Understand the characteristics of a good hypothesis. 
Theories and Hypotheses 
Before descri bing ho w to de velop a h ypothesis, i t is impor tant to distinguish be tween a the ory and a 
hypothesis. A  theory is a c oherent e xplanation or in terpretation o f one or mor e phenomena. Althoug h 
theories can take a variety of forms, one thing they have in common is that they go beyond the phenomena 
they explain by including variables, structures, processes, functions, or organizing principles that have not 
been obser ved dir ectly. Consider, f or e xample, Zajonc ’s the ory o f social facili tation and social inhi bition 
(1965)1. H e pr oposed tha t being w atched b y others while perf orming a task cr eates a g eneral sta te o f 
physiological arousal, which incr eases the lik elihood of the dominan t (most likely) response. So f or highly 
practiced tasks, being w atched incr eases the tendenc y to mak e c orrect r esponses, but f or r elatively 
unpracticed tasks, being w atched incr eases the tendenc y to mak e inc orrect r esponses. N otice tha t this 
theory—which has c ome to be c alled drive theory—provides an e xplanation of both social facili tation and 
social inhibition that goes beyond the phenomena themsel ves by including concepts such as “arousal” and 
“dominant response,” along with processes such as the effect of arousal on the dominant response. 
Outside o f scienc e, r eferring to an ide a as a the ory o ften implies tha t i t is un tested—perhaps no mor e 
than a wild guess. I n scienc e, ho wever, the term the ory has no such implic ation. A the ory is simpl y an 
explanation or interpretation of a set of phenomena. It can be untested, but it can also be extensively tested, 
well suppor ted, and ac cepted as an ac curate description o f the w orld b y the scien tific c ommunity. The 
theory of evolution by natural selection, for example, is a theory because it is an explanation of the diversity 
of lif e on e arth—not be cause i t is un tested or unsuppor ted b y scien tific r esearch. On the c ontrary, the 
evidence for this the ory is o verwhelmingly positive and ne arly all scien tists accept its basic assumptions 
as accurate. Similarly, the “ germ theory” of disease is a the ory because i t is an e xplanation of the orig in 
of various diseases, not because there is any doubt that many diseases are caused by microorganisms that 
infect the body. 
A hypothesis, on the other hand, is a specific prediction about a new phenomenon that should be observed 
if a particular theory is accurate. It is an explanation that relies on just a few key concepts. Hypotheses are 
40  |  Developing a Hypothesisoften specific predictions about what will happen in a par ticular study. They are developed by considering 
existing e vidence and using r easoning to inf er wha t will happen in the spe cific c ontext o f in terest. 
Hypotheses are often but not al ways derived from theories. So a h ypothesis is often a prediction based on 
a theory but some h ypotheses are a-theoretical and onl y after a se t of observations have been made, is a 
theory developed. This is because theories are broad in nature and they explain larger bodies of data. So if 
our research question is really original then we may need to collect some data and make some observations 
before we can develop a broader theory. 
Theories and hypotheses always have this if-then relationship. “If drive theory is correct, then cockroaches 
should run through a straight runway faster, and a branching runway more slowly, when other cockroaches 
are present.” Althoug h hypotheses are usually expressed as sta tements, they can always be r ephrased as 
questions. “Do c ockroaches run thr ough a str aight runway faster when other c ockroaches are present?” 
Thus deriving hypotheses from theories is an excellent way of generating interesting research questions. 
But ho w do r esearchers deriv e h ypotheses fr om the ories? One w ay is to g enerate a r esearch question 
using the techniques discussed in this chapter  and then ask whe ther any theory implies an answ er to that 
question. For example, you might wonder whether expressive writing about positive experiences improves 
health as much as e xpressive writing about traumatic experiences. Although this question is an interesting
one on its own, you might then ask whether the habituation theory—the idea that expressive writing causes 
people to habituate to negative thoughts and feelings—implies an answer. In this case, it seems clear that if 
the habituation theory is correct, then expressive writing about positive experiences should not be effective 
because it would not cause people to habi tuate to negative thoughts and feelings. A second way to derive 
hypotheses fr om the ories is to f ocus on some c omponent o f the the ory tha t has not y et be en dir ectly 
observed. For example, a researcher could focus on the process of habituation—perhaps hypothesizing that 
people should show fewer signs of emotional distress with each new writing session. 
Among the v ery best h ypotheses ar e those tha t distinguish be tween c ompeting the ories. F or e xample, 
Norbert Sch warz and his c olleagues c onsidered t wo the ories o f ho w pe ople mak e judgmen ts about 
themselves, such as ho w assertive they are (Schwarz et al., 1991) 2. Both theories held tha t such judgmen ts 
are base d on r elevant e xamples tha t pe ople bring to mind. H owever, one the ory w as tha t pe ople base 
their judgments on the  number of examples they bring to mind and the other w as that people base their 
judgments on how easily they bring those e xamples to mind. To test these the ories, the researchers asked 
people to recall either six times when they were assertive (which is easy for most people) or 12 times (which 
is difficult for most people). Then they asked them to judge their own assertiveness. Note that the number-
of-examples the ory implies tha t pe ople who r ecalled 12 e xamples should judg e themsel ves to be mor e 
assertive because they recalled more examples, but the e ase-of-examples theory implies that participants 
who recalled six e xamples should judg e themselves as mor e assertive because recalling the e xamples was 
easier. Thus the t wo the ories made opposi te pr edictions so tha t onl y one o f the pr edictions c ould be 
confirmed. The surprising result was that participants who recalled fewer examples judged themselves to be 
more assertive—providing particularly convincing evidence in favor of the ease-of-retrieval theory over the 
number-of-examples theory. 
Developing a Hypothesis  |  41Theory Testing 
The primar y w ay tha t scien tific r esearchers use the ories is some times c alled the hypothetico-
deductive method (although this term is much mor e likely to be use d by philosophers o f science than b y 
scientists themselves). Researchers begin with a set of phenomena and either construct a theory to explain 
or interpret them or choose an existing theory to work with. They then make a prediction about some new 
phenomenon that should be obser ved if the the ory is correct. Again, this pr ediction is called a hypothesis. 
The researchers then conduct an empirical study to test the hypothesis. Finally, they reevaluate the theory 
in light of the new results and revise it if necessary. This process is usually conceptualized as a cycle because 
the researchers can then derive a new hypothesis from the revised theory, conduct a new empirical study to 
test the hypothesis, and so on. As Figure 2.3 shows, this approach meshes nicely with the model of scientific 
research in psychology presented earlier in the te xtbook—creating a more detailed model of “theoretically 
motivated” or “theory-driven” research. 
 
Figure 2.3 Hypothetico-Deductive Method Combined With the General Model of 
Scientific Research in Psychology Together they form a model of theoretically 
motivated research. 
As an e xample, le t us c onsider Zajonc ’s r esearch on social facili tation and inhi bition. H e star ted wi th a 
somewhat c ontradictory pa ttern o f r esults fr om the r esearch li terature. H e then c onstructed his driv e 
theory, according to which being w atched by others while perf orming a task c auses physiological arousal, 
which incr eases an or ganism’s tendenc y to mak e the dominan t r esponse. This the ory pr edicts social 
facilitation for well-learned tasks and social inhi bition for poorly learned tasks. H e now had a the ory that 
organized pr evious r esults in a me aningful w ay—but he still ne eded to test i t. H e h ypothesized tha t if 
42  |  Developing a Hypothesishis theory was correct, he should obser ve that the pr esence of others impr oves performance in a simple 
laboratory task but inhi bits perf ormance in a dif ficult v ersion o f the v ery same labor atory task. T o test 
this h ypothesis, one o f the studies he c onducted use d c ockroaches as subje cts (Zajonc, H eingartner, & 
Herman, 1969 )3. The c ockroaches r an ei ther do wn a str aight run way ( an e asy task f or a c ockroach) or 
through a cross-shaped maze (a difficult task for a cockroach) to escape into a dark chamber when a lig ht 
was shine d on them. The y did this ei ther while alone or in the pr esence o f other c ockroaches in cle ar 
plastic “audience bo xes.” Zajonc f ound tha t c ockroaches in the str aight runway r eached their g oal mor e 
quickly in the presence of other cockroaches, but cockroaches in the cross-shaped maze reached their goal 
more slowly when they were in the pr esence of other cockroaches. Thus he c onfirmed his hypothesis and 
provided support for his driv e theory. (Zajonc also sho wed that drive theory existed in humans [Zajonc & 
Sales, 1966]4 in many other studies afterward). 
Incorporating Theory into Your Research 
When you write your research report or plan your presentation, be aware that there are two basic ways 
that researchers usually include theory. The first is to raise a research question, answer that question by 
conducting a new study, and then offer one or more theories (usually more) to explain or interpret the 
results. This format works well for applied research questions and for research questions that existing 
theories do not address. The second way is to describe one or more existing theories, derive a hypothesis 
from one of those theories, test the hypothesis in a new study, and finally reevaluate the theory. This 
format works well when there is an existing theory that addresses the research question—especially if the 
resulting hypothesis is surprising or conflicts with a hypothesis derived from a different theory. 
To use the ories in y our research will not onl y give you guidance in c oming up wi th experiment ideas and 
possible projects, but i t lends leg itimacy to y our work. Psychologists have been interested in a v ariety of 
human behaviors and have developed many theories along the way. Using established theories will help you 
break new ground as a researcher, not limit you from developing your own ideas. 
Characteristics of a Good Hypothesis 
There ar e thr ee g eneral char acteristics o f a g ood h ypothesis. F irst, a g ood h ypothesis must be testable 
and f alsifiable. We must be able to test the h ypothesis using the me thods o f scienc e and if y ou’ll recall 
Popper’s falsifiability criterion, it must be possi ble to ga ther evidence that will disc onfirm the h ypothesis 
if it is inde ed false. Se cond, a g ood hypothesis must be logical. As described above, hypotheses are more 
than just a random guess. Hypotheses should be informed by previous theories or observations and logical 
reasoning. Typically, we begin with a br oad and g eneral theory and use  deductive reasoning to generate a 
more specific hypothesis to test base d on tha t theory. Occasionally, however, when ther e is no the ory to 
inform our h ypothesis, we use inductive reasoning which involves using spe cific observations or r esearch 
findings to f orm a mor e g eneral h ypothesis. F inally, the h ypothesis should be positive. That is, the 
hypothesis should mak e a posi tive statement about the e xistence of a r elationship or  effect, rather than 
Developing a Hypothesis  |  43a sta tement tha t a r elationship or ef fect does not e xist. As scien tists, w e don ’t se t out to sho w tha t 
relationships do not exist or that effects do not occur so our hypotheses should not be worded in a way to 
suggest that an effect or relationship does not exist. The nature of science is to assume that something does 
not exist and then seek to find evidence to prove this wrong, to show that it really does exist. That may seem 
backward to you but that is the nature of the scientific method. The underlying reason for this is beyond the 
scope of this chapter but it has to do with statistical theory. 
Notes 
1. Zajonc, R. B. (1965). Social facilitation. Science, 149, 269–274 
2. Schwarz, N., Bless, H., Strack, F., Klumpp, G., Rittenauer-Schatka, H., & Simons, A. (1991). Ease of retrieval as 
information: Another look at the availability heuristic. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 195–202. 
3. Zajonc, R. B., Heingartner, A., & Herman, E. M. (1969). Social enhancement and impairment of performance in the 
cockroach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 13, 83–92. 
4. Zajonc, R.B. & Sales, S.M. (1966). Social facilitation of dominant and subordinate responses. Journal of Experimental 
Social Psychology, 2, 160-168. 
44  |  Developing a Hypothesis11.  Designing a Research Study 
Learning Objectives 
1. Define the concept of a variable, distinguish quantitative from categorical variables, and give examples of 
variables that might be of interest to psychologists. 
2. Explain the difference between a population and a sample. 
3. Distinguish between experimental and non-experimental research. 
4. Distinguish between lab studies, field studies, and field experiments. 
Identifying and Defining the Variables and Population 
Variables and Operational Definitions 
Part of generating a hypothesis involves identifying the variables that you want to study and operationally 
defining those variables so that they can be measured. Research questions in psychology are about variables. 
A variable is a quan tity or quali ty that varies across people or si tuations. For example, the heig ht of the 
students enrolled in a university course is a variable because it varies from student to student. The chosen 
major of the studen ts is also a v ariable as long as not e veryone in the class has de clared the same major . 
Almost everything in our world varies and as such thinking of examples of constants (things that don’t vary) 
is far more difficult. A rare example of a constant is the spe ed of light. Variables can be either quantitative 
or categorical. A quantitative variable is a quantity, such as height, that is typically measured by assigning a 
number to each individual. Other e xamples of quantitative variables include people’s level of talkativeness, 
how depressed they are, and the number o f siblings they have. A categorical variable is a quali ty, such as 
chosen major, and is t ypically measured by assigning a c ategory label to e ach individual (e.g., Psychology, 
English, Nursing, etc.). Other examples include people’s nationality, their occupation, and whether they are 
receiving psychotherapy. 
After the r esearcher g enerates their h ypothesis and sele cts the v ariables the y w ant to manipula te and 
measure, the r esearcher ne eds to find w ays to ac tually me asure the v ariables o f in terest. This r equires 
an operational definition—a definition of the variable in terms o f precisely how it is to be me asured. Most 
variables tha t r esearchers ar e in terested in stud ying c annot be dir ectly obser ved or me asured and this 
poses a pr oblem because empiricism ( observation) is a t the he art of the scien tific method. Operationally 
defining a v ariable involves taking an abstr act construct like depression that cannot be dir ectly observed 
and tr ansforming i t in to some thing tha t c an be dir ectly obser ved and me asured. M ost v ariables c an be 
Designing a Research Study  |  45operationally define d in man y dif ferent w ays. F or e xample, depr ession c an be oper ationally define d as 
people’s scores on a paper-and-pencil depression scale such as the Beck Depression Inventory, the number 
of depressive symptoms they are experiencing, or whether they have been diagnosed with major depressive 
disorder. Researchers are wise to choose an oper ational defini tion that has be en used extensively in the 
research literature. 
Sampling and Measurement 
In addi tion to iden tifying which v ariables to manipula te and me asure, and oper ationally defining those 
variables, r esearchers ne ed to iden tify the popula tion o f in terest. R esearchers in psy chology ar e usuall y 
interested in dr awing c onclusions about some v ery lar ge gr oup o f pe ople. This is c alled the  population. 
It c ould be all Americ an te enagers, childr en wi th a utism, pr ofessional a thletes, or e ven just human 
beings—depending on the in terests and goals of the researcher. But they usually study only a small subse t 
or sample of the popula tion. For example, a r esearcher might measure the talka tiveness of a f ew hundred 
university students with the intention of drawing conclusions about the talkativeness of men and women in 
general. It is important, therefore, for researchers to use a representative sample—one that is similar to the 
population in important respects. 
One method of obtaining a sample is simple random sampling, in which e very member o f the popula tion 
has an equal chance of being selected for the sample. For example, a pollster could start with a list of all the 
registered voters in a ci ty (the population), randomly select 100 of them from the list (the sample), and ask 
those 100 whom the y intend to vote for. Unfortunately, random sampling is dif ficult or impossible in most 
psychological research because the populations are less clearly defined than the registered voters in a city. 
How could a r esearcher give all Americ an teenagers or all childr en with autism an e qual chance of being 
selected for a sample? The most common alternative to random sampling is convenience sampling, in which 
the sample consists of individuals who happen to be nearby and willing to participate (such as introductory 
psychology students). Of course, the obvious problem with convenience sampling is that the sample mig ht 
not be r epresentative of the popula tion and ther efore it may be less appr opriate to g eneralize the r esults 
from the sample to that population. 
Experimental vs. Non-Experimental Research 
The next step a researcher must take is to decide which type of approach they will use to c ollect the data. 
As you will learn in your research methods course there are many different approaches to research that can 
be divided in many different ways. One of the most fundamen tal distinctions is between experimental and 
non-experimental research. 
46  |  Designing a Research StudyExperimental Research 
Researchers who w ant to test h ypotheses about c ausal relationships between variables ( i.e., their g oal is 
to e xplain) ne ed to use an e xperimental me thod. This is be cause the e xperimental me thod is the onl y 
method that allows us to determine causal relationships. Using the experimental approach, researchers first 
manipulate one or more variables while attempting to control extraneous variables, and then they measure 
how the manipulated variables affect participants’ responses. 
The terms independent variable and dependent variable are used in the c ontext of experimental research. 
The independent variable is the variable the experimenter manipulates (it is the pr esumed cause) and the 
dependent variable is the variable the experimenter measures (it is the presumed effect). 
Extraneous variables are any variable other than the dependen t variable. Confounds are a specific type of 
extraneous variable that systematically varies along wi th the v ariables under in vestigation and ther efore 
provides an alterna tive e xplanation f or the r esults. W hen r esearchers design an e xperiment the y ne ed 
to ensur e tha t the y c ontrol f or c onfounds; the y ne ed to ensur e tha t e xtraneous v ariables don’t be come 
confounding variables because in or der to mak e a c ausal conclusion they need to mak e sure alternative 
explanations for the results have been ruled out. 
As an example, if we manipulate the lig hting in the r oom and examine the ef fects of that manipulation on 
workers’ pr oductivity, then the lig hting c onditions (brig ht lig hts vs. dim lig hts) w ould be c onsidered the 
independent v ariable and the w orkers’ pr oductivity w ould be c onsidered the dependen t v ariable. I f the 
bright lights are noisy then that noise would be a confound since the noise would be present whenever the 
lights are bright and the noise w ould be absen t when the lig hts are dim. I f noise is v arying systematically 
with light then we wouldn’t know if a dif ference in worker productivity across the t wo lighting conditions 
is due to noise or light. So confounds are bad, they disrupt our ability to make causal conclusions about the 
nature of the relationship between variables. However, if there is noise in the room both when the lights are 
on and when the lig hts are off then noise is mer ely an e xtraneous variable (it is a v ariable other than the 
independent or dependent variable) and we don’t worry much about e xtraneous variables. This is be cause 
unless a variable varies systematically with the manipulated independent variable it cannot be a competing 
explanation for the results. 
Non-Experimental Research 
Researchers who ar e simpl y in terested in descri bing char acteristics o f pe ople, descri bing r elationships 
between variables, and using those r elationships to mak e predictions can use non-e xperimental research. 
Using the non-experimental approach, the researcher simply measures variables as they naturally occur, but 
they do not manipulate them. For instance, if I just measured the number of traffic fatalities in America last 
year that involved the use o f a cell phone but I did not ac tually manipulate cell phone use then this w ould 
be categorized as non-e xperimental research. Alternatively, if I stood a t a busy in tersection and r ecorded 
drivers’ genders and whether or not they were using a cell phone when they passed through the intersection 
to see whether men or w omen are more likely to use a c ell phone when driving, then this w ould be non-
Designing a Research Study  |  47experimental r esearch. I t is impor tant to poin t out tha t non-e xperimental does not me an nonscien tific. 
Non-experimental research is scientific in nature. It can be used to fulfill two of the three goals of science (to 
describe and to pr edict). However, unlike with experimental research, we cannot make causal conclusions 
using this method; we cannot say that one variable causes another variable using this method. 
Laboratory vs. Field Research 
The next major distinction between research methods is between laboratory and field studies. A laboratory 
study is a study that is conducted in the laboratory environment. In contrast, a field study is a study that is 
conducted in the real-world, in a natural environment. 
Laboratory experiments typically have high internal validity. Internal validity refers to the degree to which 
we can confidently infer a causal relationship between variables. When we conduct an experimental study 
in a laboratory environment we have very high internal validity because we manipulate one variable while 
controlling all other outside e xtraneous v ariables. W hen w e manipula te an independen t v ariable and 
observe an ef fect on a dependen t variable and w e control for everything else so tha t the onl y difference 
between our e xperimental gr oups or c onditions is the one manipula ted v ariable then w e c an be qui te 
confident tha t i t is the independen t v ariable tha t is c ausing the chang e in the dependen t v ariable. I n 
contrast, because field studies are conducted in the real-world, the experimenter typically has less control 
over the environment and potential extraneous variables, and this decreases internal validity, making it less 
appropriate to arrive at causal conclusions. 
But ther e is t ypically a tr ade-off be tween in ternal and e xternal v alidity. External v alidity simply r efers 
to the degr ee to which w e can generalize the findings to other cir cumstances or se ttings, like the r eal-
world en vironment. W hen in ternal v alidity is hig h, e xternal v alidity tends to be lo w; and when in ternal 
validity is low, external validity tends to be hig h. So laboratory studies are typically low in external validity, 
while field studies are typically high in external validity. Since field studies are conducted in the real-world 
environment it is far more appropriate to generalize the findings to that real-world environment than when 
the research is conducted in the more artificial sterile laboratory. 
Finally, there are field studies which ar e non-experimental in na ture because nothing is manipula ted. But 
there ar e also field experiments where an independen t v ariable is manipula ted in a na tural se tting and 
extraneous variables are controlled. Depending on their overall quality and the level of control of extraneous 
variables, such field experiments can have high external and high internal validity. 
48  |  Designing a Research Study12.  Analyzing the Data 
Learning Objectives 
1. Distinguish between descriptive and inferential statistics 
2. Identify the different kinds of descriptive statistics researchers use to summarize their data 
3. Describe the purpose of inferential statistics. 
4. Distinguish between Type I and Type II errors. 
 
Once the stud y is c omplete and the obser vations ha ve be en made and r ecorded the r esearchers ne ed 
to anal yze the da ta and dr aw their c onclusions. Typic ally, da ta ar e anal yzed using both descriptiv e and 
inferential statistics. Descriptive statistics are used to summarize the data and inferential statistics are used 
to generalize the results from the sample to the popula tion. In turn, inferential statistics are used to make 
conclusions about whether or not a theory has been supported, refuted, or requires modification. 
Descriptive Statistics 
Descriptive sta tistics ar e use d to or ganize or summariz e a se t o f da ta. Examples include per centages, 
measures o f c entral tendenc y (mean, me dian, mode), me asures o f dispersion ( range, standar d de viation, 
variance), and correlation coefficients. 
Measures o f c entral tendenc y ar e use d to descri be the t ypical, a verage and c enter o f a distri bution o f 
scores. The mode is the most frequently occurring score in a distribution. The median is the midpoint of a 
distribution of scores. The mean is the average of a distribution of scores. 
Measures of dispersion ar e also c onsidered descriptive statistics. They are used to descri be the degr ee of 
spread in a se t of scores. So ar e all o f the sc ores similar and cluster ed around the me an or is ther e a lot 
of variability in the sc ores? The range is a me asure of dispersion tha t measures the distanc e between the 
highest and lo west sc ores in a distri bution. The standard devia tion is a mor e sophistic ated me asure o f 
dispersion that measures the average distance of scores from the mean. The variance is just the standar d 
deviation squar ed. So i t also me asures the distanc e o f sc ores fr om the me an but in a dif ferent uni t o f 
measure. 
Typically me ans and standar d de viations ar e c omputed f or e xperimental r esearch studies in which an 
independent v ariable w as manipula ted to pr oduce t wo or mor e gr oups and a dependen t v ariable w as 
Analyzing the Data  |  49measured quantitatively. The me ans from each experimental group or c ondition are calculated separately 
and are compared to see if they differ. 
For non-experimental research, simple percentages may be computed to describe the percentage of people 
who engaged in some behavior or held some belief. But more commonly non-experimental research involves 
computing the c orrelation be tween t wo v ariables. A correlation coefficien t describes the str ength and 
direction of the relationship between two variables. The values of a correlation coefficient can range from 
−1.00 (the strongest possi ble negative relationship) to + 1.00 (the strongest possi ble posi tive relationship). 
A v alue o f 0 me ans ther e is no r elationship be tween the t wo v ariables. P ositive c orrelation c oefficients 
indicate that as the v alues of one variable increase, so do the v alues of the other v ariable. A good example 
of a posi tive correlation is the c orrelation between height and weight, because as heig ht increases weight 
also tends to incr ease. Negative correlation coefficients indicate that as the v alue of one variable increase, 
the values of the other v ariable decrease. An e xample of a nega tive correlation is the c orrelation between 
stressful life events and happiness; because as stress increases, happiness is likely to decrease. 
Inferential Statistics 
As you learned in the se ction of this chapter on sampling, t ypically researchers sample fr om a popula tion 
but ultimately they want to be able to g eneralize their r esults from the sample to a br oader population. 
Researchers typically want to infer what the population is like based on the sample they studied. Inferential 
statistics ar e use d f or tha t purpose. Inferential sta tistics allow r esearchers to dr aw c onclusions about 
a popula tion base d on da ta fr om a sample. I nferential sta tistics ar e crucial be cause the ef fects ( i.e., the 
differences in the me ans or the c orrelation coefficient) that researchers find in a stud y may be due simpl y 
to random chance variability or the y may be due to a r eal effect (i.e., they may reflect a r eal relationship 
between variables or a real effect of an independent variable on a dependent variable). 
Researchers use inf erential sta tistics to de termine whe ther their ef fects ar e sta tistically signific ant. A 
statistically significant effect is one that is unlikely due to random chance and therefore likely represents 
a real effect in the popula tion. More specifically results that have less than a 5% chanc e of being due to 
random error are typically considered statistically significant. When an effect is statistically significant it is 
appropriate to generalize the results from the sample to the popula tion. In contrast, if inferential statistics 
reveal tha t ther e is mor e than a 5% chanc e tha t an ef fect c ould be due to chanc e err or alone then the 
researcher must conclude that their result is not statistically significant. 
It is important to keep in mind that statistics are probabilistic in nature. They allow researchers to determine 
whether the chances are low that their results are due to random error, but they don’t provide any absolute 
certainty. H opefully, when w e c onclude tha t an ef fect is sta tistically signific ant i t is a r eal ef fect tha t 
we would find if w e tested the en tire population. And hopefull y when w e conclude that an ef fect is not 
statistically significant there really is no effect and if we tested the entire population we would find no effect. 
And that 5% threshold is set at 5% to ensure that there is a high probability that we make a correct decision 
and that our determination of statistical significance is an accurate reflection of reality. 
But mistakes can always be made. S pecifically, two kinds o f mistakes can be made. F irst, researchers can 
50  |  Analyzing the Datamake a Type I err or, which is a false posi tive. I t is when a r esearcher c oncludes tha t their r esults ar e 
statistically significant (so they say there is an effect in the population) when in reality there is no real effect 
in the popula tion and the r esults are just due to chanc e (they are a fluk e). W hen the thr eshold is se t to 
5%, which is the c onvention, then the r esearcher has a 5% chanc e or less o f making a Type I err or. You 
might wonder why researchers don’t set it even lower to reduce the chances of making a Type I err or. The 
reason is when the chanc es of making a Type I err or are reduced, the chanc es of making a Type II err or 
are increased. A Type II error is a missed opportunity. It is when a r esearcher concludes that their results 
are not sta tistically significant when in r eality there is a r eal effect in the popula tion and the y just misse d 
detecting it. Once again, these Type II errors are more likely to occur when the threshold is set too low (e.g., 
set at 1% instead of 5%) and/or when the sample was too small. 
Analyzing the Data  |  5113.  Drawing Conclusions and Reporting the 
Results 
Learning Objectives 
1. Identify the conclusions researchers can make based on the outcome of their studies. 
2. Describe why scientists avoid the term “scientific proof.” 
3. Explain the different ways that scientists share their findings. 
Drawing Conclusions 
Since statistics are probabilistic in na ture and findings c an reflect type I or t ype II err ors, we cannot use 
the results of a single study to conclude with certainty that a theory is true. Rather theories are supported, 
refuted, or modified based on the results of research. 
If the r esults are statistically significant and c onsistent with the h ypothesis and the the ory that was used 
to generate the h ypothesis, then r esearchers can conclude that the the ory is suppor ted. Not only did the 
theory make an accurate prediction, but there is now a new phenomenon that the theory accounts for. If a 
hypothesis is disconfirmed in a systematic empirical study, then the theory has been weakened. It made an 
inaccurate prediction, and there is now a new phenomenon that it does not account for. 
Although this seems str aightforward, ther e ar e some c omplications. F irst, c onfirming a h ypothesis c an 
strengthen a theory but it can never prove a theory. In fact, scientists tend to avoid the word “prove” when 
talking and wri ting about the ories. One r eason f or this a voidance is tha t the r esult ma y r eflect a t ype I 
error.  Another reason for this avoidance is that there may be other pla usible theories that imply the same 
hypothesis, which me ans tha t c onfirming the h ypothesis str engthens all those the ories e qually. A thir d 
reason is that it is always possible that another test of the hypothesis or a test of a new hypothesis derived 
from the the ory will be disc onfirmed. This difficulty is a v ersion of the famous philosophic al “problem of 
induction.” One c annot definitively prove a g eneral principle (e.g., “All swans are white.”) just b y observing 
confirming cases (e.g., white swans)—no matter how many. It is al ways possible that a disc onfirming case 
(e.g., a black swan) will eventually come along. For these reasons, scientists tend to think o f theories—even 
highly successful ones—as subject to revision based on new and unexpected observations. 
A second complication has to do wi th what it means when a h ypothesis is disconfirmed. According to the 
strictest version of the hypothetico-deductive method, disconfirming a hypothesis disproves the theory it 
was derived from. In formal logic, the premises “if A then B” and “not B” necessarily lead to the c onclusion 
52  |  Drawing Conclusions and Reporting the Results“not A.” If A is the theory and B is the hypothesis (“if A then B”), then disconfirming the hypothesis (“not B”) 
must mean that the the ory is inc orrect (“not A”). In practice, however, scientists do not g ive up on their 
theories so easily. One reason is that one disconfirmed hypothesis could be a missed opportunity (the result 
of a t ype II err or) or i t c ould be the r esult o f a fa ulty r esearch design. P erhaps the r esearcher did not 
successfully manipulate the independent variable or measure the dependent variable. 
A disc onfirmed h ypothesis c ould also me an tha t some unsta ted but r elatively minor assumption o f the 
theory was not me t. For example, if Zajonc had faile d to find social facili tation in c ockroaches, he c ould 
have c oncluded tha t driv e the ory is still c orrect but i t applies onl y to animals wi th suf ficiently c omplex 
nervous systems. That is, the evidence from a study can be used to modify a theory. This practice does not 
mean that researchers are free to ignor e disconfirmations of their the ories. If they cannot improve their 
research designs or modif y their the ories to ac count for repeated disconfirmations, then the y eventually 
must abandon their theories and replace them with ones that are more successful. 
The bottom line here is that because statistics are probabilistic in nature and because all research studies 
have flaws there is no such thing as scientific proof, there is only scientific evidence. 
Reporting the Results 
The final step in the r esearch pr ocess in volves r eporting the r esults. As descri bed in the se ction on 
Reviewing the R esearch Literature in this chapter , results are typically reported in pe er-reviewed journal 
articles and at conferences. 
The most pr estigious way to r eport one’s findings is b y wri ting a manuscript and ha ving i t publishe d in 
a peer-reviewed scientific journal. Manuscripts publishe d in psy chology journals t ypically must adher e to 
the writing style of the American Psychological Association (APA style). You will likely be learning the major 
elements of this writing style in this course. 
Another way to report findings is by writing a book chapter tha t is published in an edited book. Preferably 
the e ditor o f the book puts the chapter thr ough pe er r eview but this is not al ways the c ase and some 
scientists are invited by editors to write book chapters. 
A fun way to disseminate findings is to give a presentation at a conference. This can either be done as an oral 
presentation or a poster presentation. Oral presentations involve getting up in front of an audience of fellow 
scientists and giving a talk that might last anywhere from 10 minutes to 1 hour (depending on the conference) 
and then fielding questions from the audience. Alternatively, poster presentations involve summarizing the 
study on a large poster that provides a brief overview of the purpose, methods, results, and discussion. The 
presenter stands b y their poster f or an hour or t wo and discusses i t with people who pass b y. Presenting 
one’s work at a conference is a great way to get feedback from one’s peers before attempting to undergo the 
more rigorous peer-review process involved in publishing a journal article. 
Drawing Conclusions and Reporting the Results  |  5314.  Key Takeaways and Exercise 
Key Takeaways 
• Research in psychology can be described by a simple cyclical model. A research question based on the 
research literature leads to an empirical study, the results of which are published and become part of the 
research literature. 
• The research literature in psychology is all the published research in psychology, consisting primarily of 
articles in professional journals and scholarly books. 
• Early in the research process, it is important to conduct a review of the research literature on your topic 
to refine your research question, identify appropriate research methods, place your question in the 
context of other research, and prepare to write an effective research report. 
• There are several strategies for finding previous research on your topic. Among the best is using 
PsycINFO, a computer database that catalogs millions of articles, books, and book chapters in psychology 
and related fields. 
• Research questions expressed in terms of variables and relationships between variables can be suggested 
by other researchers or generated by asking a series of more general questions about the behavior or 
psychological characteristic of interest. 
• It is important to evaluate how interesting a research question is before designing a study and collecting 
data to answer it. Factors that affect interestingness are the extent to which the answer is in doubt, 
whether it fills a gap in the research literature, and whether it has important practical implications. 
• It is also important to evaluate how feasible a research question will be to answer. Factors that affect 
feasibility include time, money, technical knowledge and skill, and access to special equipment and 
research participants. 
• A theory is broad in nature and explains larger bodies of data. A hypothesis is more specific and makes a 
prediction about the outcome of a particular study. 
• Working with theories is not “icing on the cake.” It is a basic ingredient of psychological research. 
• Like other scientists, psychologists use the hypothetico-deductive method. They construct theories to 
explain or interpret phenomena (or work with existing theories), derive hypotheses from their theories, 
test the hypotheses, and then reevaluate the theories in light of the new results. 
• Variables vary across people or situations and may be quantitative (e.g., age) or categorical (e.g., course 
subject). 
• A sample is a small subset of a larger population that is selected to participate in the research study. 
There are many different ways of sampling participants including convenience sampling and simple 
random sampling. 
• Experimental research involves manipulating an independent variable to observe the effects on a 
measured dependent variable while non-experimental research involves measuring variables as they 
naturally occur (i.e., without manipulating anything). 
• Research can be conducted in the field or the lab. Laboratory experiments tend to have high internal 
validity (allowing us to make strong causal conclusions), while field studies often have more external 
validity (allowing us to generalize to the real world). 
• The mean, median, and mode are measures of central tendency used to describe the typical, average, or 
54  |  Key Takeaways and Exercisecenter scores in a distribution. The range, standard deviation, and variance are measures of how 
dispersed or spread apart the scores are. Measures of central tendency and dispersion are important 
descriptive statistics. 
• Inferential statistics allow researchers to determine whether their findings are statistically significant, 
that is, whether they are unlikely to be due to chance alone and therefore are likely to represent a real 
effect in the population. 
• Since statistics are probabilistic in nature we never know if our conclusions are correct. We can make 
type I errors (concluding an effect is real when it is not) or type II errors (concluding there is no effect 
when there actually is a real effect in the population). 
• Theories can be supported by not proved. Similarly, disconfirming a hypothesis does not necessarily 
mean that theory has been disproved. 
• The final step of the research process involves reporting results at scientific conferences, in journal 
articles, and/or in books. 
Exercises 
• Practice: Find a description of an empirical study in a professional journal or in one of the scientific 
psychology blogs. Then write a brief description of the research in terms of the cyclical model presented 
here. One or two sentences for each part of the cycle should suffice. 
• Watch the following TED Ed video, in which David H. Schwartz provides an introduction to two types of 
empirical studies along with some methods that scientists use to increase the reliability of their results: 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view 
them online here: https://kpu.pressbooks.pub/psychmethods4e/?p=271#oembed-1 
◦ Reading in print? Go to https://youtu.be/GUpd2HJHUt8 or scan this QR code with your phone: 
• Practice: Use the techniques discussed in this section to find 10 journal articles and book chapters on one 
of the following research ideas: memory for smells, aggressive driving, the causes of narcissistic 
personality disorder, the functions of the intraparietal sulcus, or prejudice against the physically 
handicapped. 
• Watch the following video clip produced by UBCiSchool about how to read an academic paper (without 
Key Takeaways and Exercise  |  55