Reading in print? 
Scan this QR code 
to view the video 
on your mobile 
device. Or go to 
youtu.be/
o65l1YAVaYc 
CHAPTER  III 
RESEARCH ETHICS 
In 1998 a me dical journal c alled The Lancet  published an ar ticle o f in terest to man y psy chologists. The 
researchers claime d to ha ve sho wn a sta tistical r elationship be tween r eceiving the c ombined me asles, 
mumps, and rubella (MMR) v accine and the de velopment o f a utism—suggesting fur thermore tha t the 
vaccine might even cause autism. One result of this report was that many parents decided not to have their 
children vaccinated, which o f course put them a t hig her risk f or measles, mumps, and rubella. H owever, 
follow-up studies by other researchers consistently failed to find a statistical relationship between the MMR 
vaccine and autism—and it is widely accepted now in the scientific community that there is no relationship. 
In addition, several more serious pr oblems with the orig inal research were uncovered. Among them w ere 
that the lead researcher stood to gain financially from his conclusions because he had patented a competing 
measles vaccine. He had also used biased methods to select and test his research participants and had used 
unapproved and medically unnecessary procedures on them. I n 2010 The Lancet retracted the article, and 
the lead researcher’s right to practice medicine was revoked (Burns, 2010).1 
In this chapter w e e xplore the e thics o f scien tific r esearch in psy chology. W e beg in wi th a g eneral 
framework for thinking about the ethics of scientific research in psychology. Then we look at some specific 
ethical c odes f or biome dical and beha vioral r esearchers — focusing on the E thics Code o f the Americ an 
Psychological Associa tion. F inally, w e c onsider some pr actical tips f or c onducting e thical r esearch in 
psychology. 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view 
them online here: https://kpu.pressbooks.pub/psychmethods4e/?p=46#oembed-1 
Media Attributions 
Vaccines Don’t Cause Autism: Healthcare Triage #12 by Healthcare Triage licensed under 
a Standard YouTube Licence. 
Notes 
1. Burns, J. F. (2010, May 24). British medical council bars doctor who linked vaccine to autism. The New York Times. 
Retrieved from: http://www.nytimes.com/2010/05/25/health/policy/25autism.html 
Research Ethics  |  5715.  Moral Foundations of Ethical Research 
Learning Objectives 
1. Describe a simple framework for thinking about ethical issues in psychological research. 
2. Give examples of several ethical issues that arise in psychological research—including ones that affect 
research participants, the scientific community, and society more generally. 
 
Ethics is the br anch of philosophy that is c oncerned with morality—what it means to beha ve morally and 
how people can achieve that goal. It can also r efer to a se t of principles and pr actices that provide moral 
guidance in a par ticular field. Ther e is an e thics of business, me dicine, teaching, and o f course, scientific 
research. As the opening e xample illustrates, many kinds o f ethical issues c an arise in scien tific research, 
especially when it involves human participants. For this reason, it is useful to begin with a general framework 
for thinking through these issues. 
A Framework for Thinking About Research Ethics 
Table 3.1 pr esents a fr amework for thinking thr ough the e thical issues in volved in psy chological research. 
The rows of Table 3.1 represent four general moral principles that apply to scientific research: weighing risks 
against benefits, acting responsibly and wi th integrity, seeking justice, and r especting people’s rights and 
dignity. (These principles ar e adapted from those in the Americ an Psychological Association [APA] Ethics 
Code.) The c olumns of Table 3.1 r epresent three groups of people that are affected by scientific research: 
the research participants, the scientific community, and society more generally. The idea is that a thorough 
consideration o f the e thics o f an y r esearch pr oject must tak e in to ac count ho w e ach o f the f our mor al 
principles applies to each of the three groups of people. 
 
Table 3.1 A Framework for Thinking About Ethical Issues in Scientific Research 
Moral Foundations of Ethical Research  |  59Who is affected? 
Moral principle Research participants Scientific community Society 
Weighing risks against benefits 
Acting responsibly and with 
integrity 
Seeking justice 
Respecting people’s rights and 
dignity 
Moral Principles 
Let us look mor e closely at each of the moral principles and ho w they can be applied to each of the three 
groups. 
Weighing Risks Against Benefits 
Scientific r esearch in psy chology c an be e thical onl y if i ts risks ar e out weighed b y i ts benefi ts. Among 
the risks to r esearch participants are that a tr eatment might fail to help or e ven be harmful, a pr ocedure 
might r esult in ph ysical or psy chological harm, and their rig ht to priv acy mig ht be viola ted. Among the 
potential benefits are receiving a helpful treatment, learning about psychology, experiencing the satisfaction 
of contributing to scien tific knowledge, and r eceiving money or c ourse credit for participating. Scientific 
research can have risks and benefits to the scientific community and to society too (Rosenthal, 1994).1 A risk 
to science is that if a research question is uninteresting or a study is poorly designed, then the time, money, 
and effort spent on that research could have been spent on more productive research. A risk to socie ty is 
that research results could be misunderstood or misapplied with harmful consequences. The research that 
mistakenly linked the measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) vaccine to autism resulted in both of these kinds 
of harm. Of course, the benefits of scientific research to science and society are that it advances scientific 
knowledge and can contribute to the welfare of society. 
It is not ne cessarily easy to weigh the risks o f research against i ts benefits because the risks and benefi ts 
may not be dir ectly c omparable. F or e xample, i t is c ommon f or the risks o f a stud y to be primaril y to 
the research participants but the benefi ts primarily for science or socie ty. Consider, for example, Stanley 
Milgram’s original study on obe dience to a uthority (Milgram, 1963).2 The participants were told tha t they 
were taking par t in a stud y on the ef fects of punishment on le arning and w ere instructed to g ive electric 
shocks to another par ticipant e ach time tha t par ticipant responded inc orrectly on a le arning task. W ith 
each incorrect response, the shock be came stronger—eventually causing the other par ticipant (who was 
in the ne xt r oom) to pr otest, c omplain about his he art, scr eam in pain, and finall y fall silen t and stop 
responding. I f the first par ticipant hesi tated or e xpressed c oncern, the r esearcher said tha t he must 
continue. In reality, the other par ticipant was a confederate of the researcher—a helper who pr etended to 
60  |  Moral Foundations of Ethical Researchbe a r eal par ticipant—and the pr otests, complaints, and scr eams that the r eal par ticipant heard were an 
audio recording that was activated when he flippe d the swi tch to administer the “ shocks.” The surprising 
result of this study was that most of the real participants continued to administer the shocks right through 
the confederate’s protests, complaints, and screams. Although this is considered one of the most important 
results in psychology—with implications for understanding events like the Holocaust or the mistreatment of 
prisoners by US soldiers at Abu Ghraib—it came at the cost of producing severe psychological stress in the 
research participants. 
Was It Worth It? 
Much of the debate over the ethics of Milgram’s obedience study concerns the question of whether the 
resulting scientific knowledge was worth the harm caused to the research participants. To get a better 
sense of the harm, consider Milgram’s (1963) own description of it. 
In a large number of cases, the degree of tension reached extremes that are rarely seen in 
sociopsychological laboratory studies. Subjects were observed to sweat, tremble, stutter, bite their 
lips, groan, and dig their fingernails into their flesh.…Fourteen of the 40 subjects showed definite 
signs of nervous laughter and smiling. The laughter seemed entirely out of place, even bizarre. Full-
blown uncontrollable seizures [of laughter] were observed for three subjects. On one occasion we 
observed a seizure so violently convulsive that it was necessary to call a halt to the experiment (p. 
375). 
Milgram also noted that another observer reported that within 20 minutes one participant “was reduced to 
a twitching, stuttering wreck, who was rapidly approaching the point of nervous collapse” (p. 377) 
To Milgram’s credit, he went to great lengths to debrief his participants—including returning their mental 
states to normal—and to show that most of them thought the research was valuable and they were glad to 
have participated. 
Acting Responsibly and With Integrity 
Researchers must act responsibly and with integrity. This means carrying out their research in a thorough 
and competent manner, meeting their professional obligations, and being truthful. Ac ting with integrity is 
important be cause i t pr omotes trust, which is an essen tial elemen t o f all ef fective human r elationships. 
Participants must be able to trust tha t researchers are being honest wi th them (e.g., about what the study 
involves), will keep their promises (e.g., to maintain confidentiality), and will carry out their research in ways 
that maximize benefits and minimize risk. An impor tant issue here is the use o f deception. Some research 
questions (such as Milgram’s) are difficult or impossible to answer without deceiving research participants. 
Thus acting with integrity can conflict with doing research that advances scientific knowledge and benefits 
society. We will consider how psychologists generally deal with this conflict shortly. 
Moral Foundations of Ethical Research  |  61The scien tific c ommunity and socie ty must also be able to trust tha t r esearchers ha ve c onducted their 
research thoroughly and c ompetently and tha t they have reported on i t honestly. Again, the e xample at 
the beg inning o f the chapter illustr ates wha t c an happen when this trust is viola ted. I n this c ase, other 
researchers wasted resources on unne cessary follow-up research and pe ople avoided the MMR v accine, 
putting their childr en a t incr eased risk o f me asles, mumps, and rubella. I ndeed, man y pe ople, including 
children have died as a result of parents’ misinformed decisions not to vaccinate their children. 
Seeking Justice 
Researchers must c onduct their r esearch in a just manner . They should tr eat their par ticipants fairly, for 
example, by giving them adequate compensation for their participation and making sur e that benefits and 
risks ar e distri buted acr oss all par ticipants. F or e xample, in a stud y o f a ne w and poten tially beneficial 
psychotherapy, some par ticipants might receive the psy chotherapy while others ser ve as a c ontrol group 
that receives no tr eatment. If the psy chotherapy turns out to be ef fective, i t would be fair to o ffer i t to 
participants in the control group when the study ends. 
At a broader societal level, members of some groups have historically faced more than their fair share of the 
risks of scientific research, including pe ople who ar e institutionalized, are disabled, or belong to r acial or 
ethnic minorities. A particularly tragic example is the T uskegee syphilis study conducted by the US Public 
Health Service from 1932 to 1972 (Reverby, 2009).3 The participants in this study were poor African American 
men in the vicini ty o f T uskegee, Alabama, who w ere told tha t the y w ere being tr eated f or “bad blood. ” 
Although they were given some free medical care, they were not treated for their syphilis. Instead, they were 
observed to se e how the dise ase developed in un treated patients. Even after the use o f penicillin be came 
the standard treatment for syphilis in the 1940s, these men continued to be denied treatment without being 
given an opportunity to leave the study. The study was eventually discontinued only after details were made 
known to the g eneral public by journalists and ac tivists. It is now widely recognized that researchers need 
to consider issues of justice and fairness at the societal level. 
 
“They Were Betrayed” 
In 1997—65 years after the Tuskegee Syphilis Study began and 25 years after it ended—President Bill Clinton 
formally apologized on behalf of the US government to those who were affected. Here is an excerpt from 
the apology: 
So today America does remember the hundreds of men used in research without their knowledge and 
consent. We remember them and their family members. Men who were poor and African American, without 
62  |  Moral Foundations of Ethical Researchresources and with few alternatives, they believed they had found hope when they were offered free 
medical care by the United States Public Health Service. They were betrayed. 
Read the full text of the apology at http://www.cdc.gov/tuskegee/clintonp.htm. 
Respecting People’s Rights and Dignity 
Researchers must r espect people’s rights and digni ty as human beings. One elemen t of this is r especting 
their autonomy—their right to mak e their o wn choices and tak e their o wn actions free from coercion. Of 
fundamental importance here is the concept of informed consent. This means that researchers obtain and 
document people’s agreement to participate in a study after having informed them of everything that might 
reasonably be expected to affect their decision. Consider the par ticipants in the Tuskegee study. Although 
they agr eed to par ticipate in the stud y, the y w ere not told tha t the y had syphilis but w ould be denie d 
treatment for it. Had they been told this basic fact about the study, it seems likely that they would not have 
agreed to participate. Likewise, had participants in Milgram’s study been told that they might be “reduced 
to a twitching, stuttering wreck,” it seems likely that many of them would not have agreed to participate. In 
neither of these studies did participants give true informed consent. 
Another element of respecting people’s rights and dignity is respecting their privacy—their right to decide 
what inf ormation about them is shar ed wi th others. This me ans tha t r esearchers must 
maintain confidentiality, which is essen tially an agr eement not to disclose par ticipants’ personal 
information without their consent or some appr opriate legal authorization. Even more ideally participants 
can main tain anonymity, which is when their name and other personall y iden tifiable inf ormation is not 
collected at all. 
Unavoidable Ethical Conflict 
It may already be clear that ethical conflict in psychological research is unavoidable. Because there is little, 
if any, psychological research that is c ompletely risk-free, there will almost al ways be a c onflict between 
risks and benefits. Research that is beneficial to one group (e.g., the scientific community) can be harmful to 
another (e.g., the research participants), creating especially difficult tradeoffs. We have also seen that being 
completely truthful wi th research participants can make it difficult or impossi ble to c onduct scientifically 
valid studies on important questions. 
Of c ourse, man y e thical c onflicts ar e fair ly e asy to r esolve. N early e veryone w ould agr ee tha t de ceiving 
research participants and then subje cting them to ph ysical harm w ould not be justifie d by filling a small 
gap in the r esearch literature. But many ethical conflicts are not easy to resolve, and competent and well-
meaning researchers can disagree about ho w to r esolve them. Consider , for example, an ac tual study on 
Moral Foundations of Ethical Research  |  63“personal space” conducted in a public men’s room (Middlemist, Knowles, & Matter, 1976).4 The researchers 
secretly observed their participants to see whether it took them longer to begin urinating when there was 
another man ( a confederate of the r esearchers) at a ne arby urinal. W hile some cri tics found this to be an 
unjustified assault on human digni ty (Koocher, 1977),5 the researchers had carefully considered the ethical 
conflicts, resolved them as best the y could, and c oncluded that the benefi ts of the r esearch out weighed 
the risks (Middlemist, Kno wles, & Ma tter, 19 77).6 For e xample, the y had in terviewed some pr eliminary 
participants and found that none of them was bothered by the fact that they had been observed. 
The point here is that although it may not be possible to eliminate ethical conflict completely, it is possible 
to deal with it in responsible and constructive ways. In general, this means thoroughly and carefully thinking 
through the ethical issues that are raised, minimizing the risks, and weighing the risks against the benefits. It 
also means being able to explain one’s ethical decisions to others, seeking feedback on them, and ultimately 
taking responsibility for them. 
Notes 
1. Rosenthal, R. M. (1994). Science and ethics in conducting, analyzing, and reporting psychological 
research. Psychological Science, 5, 127–133. 
2. Milgram, S. (1963). Behavioral study of obedience. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 67, 371–378. 
3. Reverby, S. M. (2009). Examining Tuskegee: The infamous syphilis study and its legacy. Chapel Hill, NC: University of 
North Carolina Press. 
4. Middlemist, R. D., Knowles, E. S., & Matter, C. F. (1976). Personal space invasions in the lavatory: Suggestive evidence 
for arousal. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 33, 541–546. 
5. Koocher, G. P. (1977). Bathroom behavior and human dignity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 120–121. 
6. Middlemist, R. D., Knowles, E. S., & Matter, C. F. (1977). What to do and what to report: A reply to Koocher. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 122–125. 
64  |  Moral Foundations of Ethical Research16.  From Moral Principles to Ethics Codes 
Learning Objectives 
1. Describe the history of ethics codes for scientific research with human participants. 
2. Summarize the American Psychological Association Ethics Code—especially as it relates to informed 
consent, deception, debriefing, research with nonhuman animals, and scholarly integrity. 
 
The general moral principles o f weighing risks against benefi ts, acting with integrity, seeking justice, and 
respecting pe ople’s rig hts and digni ty pr ovide a useful star ting poin t f or thinking about the e thics o f 
psychological research because essentially everyone agrees on them. As we have seen, however, even people 
who agree on these general principles can disagree about specific ethical issues that arise in the c ourse of 
conducting research. This is wh y there also exist more detailed and enforceable ethics codes that provide 
guidance on important issues that arise frequently. In this section, we begin with a brief historical overview 
of such ethics codes and then look closel y at the one tha t is most r elevant to psychological research—that 
of the American Psychological Association (APA). 
Historical Overview 
One o f the e arliest e thics c odes w as the  Nuremberg Code—a se t o f 10 principles wri tten in 1947 in 
conjunction with the trials of Nazi physicians accused of shockingly cruel research on concentration camp 
prisoners during W orld War II. I t provided a standar d against which to c ompare the beha vior of the men 
on trial—man y o f whom w ere e ventually c onvicted and ei ther imprisone d or sen tenced to de ath. The 
Nuremberg Code w as particularly clear about the impor tance of carefully weighing risks against benefi ts 
and the ne ed for informed consent. The Declaration of Helsinki is a similar e thics code that was created 
by the W orld M edical Council in 1964. Among the standar ds tha t i t adde d to the Nur emberg Code w as 
that r esearch wi th human par ticipants should be base d on a wri tten protocol—a de tailed description o f 
the research—that is reviewed by an independent committee. The Declaration of Helsinki has been revised 
several times, most recently in 2004. 
In the Uni ted S tates, c oncerns about the T uskegee stud y and others le d to the public ation in 19 78 o f a 
set of federal guidelines called the Belmont Report. The Belmont Report explicitly recognized the principle 
of se eking justice, including the impor tance o f c onducting r esearch in a w ay tha t distri butes risks and 
benefits fairly across different groups at the societal level. It also recognized the importance of respect for 
persons, which acknowledges individuals’ a utonomy and pr otection for those wi th diminished autonomy 
From Moral Principles to Ethics Codes  |  65(e.g., prisoners, children), and translates to the need for informed consent. Finally, it recognized the principle 
of beneficence, which underscores the importance of maximizing the benefits of research while minimizing 
harms to par ticipants and socie ty. The Belmon t R eport be came the basis o f a se t o f la ws—the 
Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects—that appl y to r esearch c onducted, suppor ted, or 
regulated by the federal government. An extremely important part of these regulations is that universities, 
hospitals, and other insti tutions tha t r eceive suppor t fr om the f ederal g overnment must establish 
an institutional review board (IRB)—a committee that is r esponsible for reviewing research protocols for 
potential ethical problems. An IRB must c onsist of at least five people with varying backgrounds, including 
members of different professions, scientists and nonscientists, men and women, and at least one person not 
otherwise affiliated with the institution. The IRB helps to make sure that the risks of the proposed research 
are minimized, the benefits outweigh the risks, the research is carried out in a fair manner, and the informed 
consent procedure is adequate. 
The f ederal r egulations also distinguish r esearch tha t poses thr ee le vels o f risk. Exempt research is the 
lowest le vel or risk and includes r esearch on the ef fectiveness o f normal e ducational ac tivities, the use 
of standard psychological measures and sur veys of a nonsensi tive nature that are administered in a w ay 
that main tains c onfidentiality, and r esearch using e xisting da ta fr om public sour ces. I t is c alled e xempt 
because once approved, it is exempt from regular, continuous review. Expedited research poses a somewhat 
higher risk than exempt, but still exposes participants to risks that are no greater than minimal risk ( those 
encountered b y he althy pe ople in dail y lif e or during r outine ph ysical or psy chological e xaminations). 
Expedited review is done b y by one member o f the IRB or b y a separate committee under the a uthority of 
the IRB that can only approve minimal risk r esearch (many departments of psychology have such separate 
committees). Finally, research that does not qualify for exempt or expedited review is greater than minimal 
risk research must be reviewed by the full board of IRB members. 
Ethics Codes 
The link tha t f ollows the list— from the Of fice o f H uman S ubjects R esearch a t the N ational I nstitutes o f 
Health—allows you to r ead the e thics codes discussed in this se ction in their en tirety. They are all hig hly 
recommended and, with the exception of the Federal Policy, short and easy to read. 
• The Nuremberg Code 
• The Declaration of Helsinki 
• The Belmont Report 
• Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects 
https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/international/ethical-codes-and-research-standards/index.html 
66  |  From Moral Principles to Ethics CodesAPA Ethics Code 
The APA’s Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct  (also known as the  APA Ethics Code) was 
first publishe d in 1953 and has be en r evised se veral times sinc e then, most r ecently in 2010 . It includes 
about 150 specific ethical standards that psychologists and their studen ts are expected to follow. Much of 
the APA Ethics Code c oncerns the clinic al practice of psychology—advertising one’s services, setting and 
collecting fees, having personal r elationships with clients, and so on. F or our purposes, the most r elevant 
part is Standard 8: R esearch and Publication . Althoug h Standard 8  is r eproduced her e in i ts en tirety, w e 
will c onsider some o f i ts most impor tant aspe cts—informed c onsent, de ception, debriefing, the use o f 
nonhuman animal subjects, and scholarly integrity—in more detail. 
 
APA Ethics Code Standard 8: Research and Publication 
8.01 Institutional Approval 
When institutional approval is required, psychologists provide accurate information about their research 
proposals and obtain approval prior to conducting the research. They conduct the research in accordance 
with the approved research protocol. 
8.02 Informed Consent to Research 
3. When obtaining informed consent as required in Standard 3.10, Informed Consent, psychologists 
inform participants about (1) the purpose of the research, expected duration, and procedures; (2) their 
right to decline to participate and to withdraw from the research once participation has begun; (3) the 
foreseeable consequences of declining or withdrawing; (4) reasonably foreseeable factors that may be 
expected to influence their willingness to participate such as potential risks, discomfort, or adverse 
effects; (5) any prospective research benefits; (6) limits of confidentiality; (7) incentives for 
participation; and (8) whom to contact for questions about the research and research participants’ 
rights. They provide opportunity for the prospective participants to ask questions and receive 
answers. (See also Standards 8.03, Informed Consent for Recording Voices and Images in Research; 
8.05, Dispensing With Informed Consent for Research; and 8.07, Deception in Research.) 
4. Psychologists conducting intervention research involving the use of experimental treatments clarify 
to participants at the outset of the research (1) the experimental nature of the treatment; (2) the 
services that will or will not be available to the control group(s) if appropriate; (3) the means by which 
assignment to treatment and control groups will be made; (4) available treatment alternatives if an 
individual does not wish to participate in the research or wishes to withdraw once a study has begun; 
and (5) compensation for or monetary costs of participating including, if appropriate, whether 
reimbursement from the participant or a third-party payor will be sought. (See also Standard 8.02a, 
Informed Consent to Research.) 
8.03 Informed Consent for Recording Voices and Images in Research 
From Moral Principles to Ethics Codes  |  67Psychologists obtain informed consent from research participants prior to recording their voices or images 
for data collection unless (1) the research consists solely of naturalistic observations in public places, and it 
is not anticipated that the recording will be used in a manner that could cause personal identification or 
harm, or (2) the research design includes deception, and consent for the use of the recording is obtained 
during debriefing. (See also Standard 8.07, Deception in Research.) 
8.04 Client/Patient, Student, and Subordinate Research Participants 
1. When psychologists conduct research with clients/patients, students, or subordinates as 
participants, psychologists take steps to protect the prospective participants from adverse 
consequences of declining or withdrawing from participation. 
2. When research participation is a course requirement or an opportunity for extra credit, the 
prospective participant is given the choice of equitable alternative activities. 
8.05 Dispensing With Informed Consent for Research 
Psychologists may dispense with informed consent only (1) where research would not reasonably be 
assumed to create distress or harm and involves (a) the study of normal educational practices, curricula, or 
classroom management methods conducted in educational settings; (b) only anonymous questionnaires, 
naturalistic observations, or archival research for which disclosure of responses would not place 
participants at risk of criminal or civil liability or damage their financial standing, employability, or 
reputation, and confidentiality is protected; or (c) the study of factors related to job or organization 
effectiveness conducted in organizational settings for which there is no risk to participants’ employability, 
and confidentiality is protected or (2) where otherwise permitted by law or federal or institutional 
regulations. 
8.06 Offering Inducements for Research Participation 
1. Psychologists make reasonable efforts to avoid offering excessive or inappropriate financial or other 
inducements for research participation when such inducements are likely to coerce participation. 
2. When offering professional services as an inducement for research participation, psychologists clarify 
the nature of the services, as well as the risks, obligations, and limitations. (See also Standard 6.05, 
Barter With Clients/Patients.) 
8.07 Deception in Research 
1. Psychologists do not conduct a study involving deception unless they have determined that the use of 
deceptive techniques is justified by the study’s significant prospective scientific, educational, or 
applied value and that effective nondeceptive alternative procedures are not feasible. 
2. Psychologists do not deceive prospective participants about research that is reasonably expected to 
cause physical pain or severe emotional distress. 
3. Psychologists explain any deception that is an integral feature of the design and conduct of an 
experiment to participants as early as is feasible, preferably at the conclusion of their participation, 
but no later than at the conclusion of the data collection, and permit participants to withdraw their 
data. (See also Standard 8.08, Debriefing.) 
8.08 Debriefing 
1. Psychologists provide a prompt opportunity for participants to obtain appropriate information about 
68  |  From Moral Principles to Ethics Codesthe nature, results, and conclusions of the research, and they take reasonable steps to correct any 
misconceptions that participants may have of which the psychologists are aware. 
2. If scientific or humane values justify delaying or withholding this information, psychologists take 
reasonable measures to reduce the risk of harm. 
3. When psychologists become aware that research procedures have harmed a participant, they take 
reasonable steps to minimize the harm. 
8.09 Humane Care and Use of Animals in Research 
1. Psychologists acquire, care for, use, and dispose of animals in compliance with current federal, state, 
and local laws and regulations, and with professional standards. 
2. Psychologists trained in research methods and experienced in the care of laboratory animals 
supervise all procedures involving animals and are responsible for ensuring appropriate consideration 
of their comfort, health, and humane treatment. 
3. Psychologists ensure that all individuals under their supervision who are using animals have received 
instruction in research methods and in the care, maintenance, and handling of the species being used, 
to the extent appropriate to their role. (See also Standard 2.05, Delegation of Work to Others.) 
4. Psychologists make reasonable efforts to minimize the discomfort, infection, illness, and pain of 
animal subjects. 
5. Psychologists use a procedure subjecting animals to pain, stress, or privation only when an alternative 
procedure is unavailable and the goal is justified by its prospective scientific, educational, or applied 
value. 
6. Psychologists perform surgical procedures under appropriate anesthesia and follow techniques to 
avoid infection and minimize pain during and after surgery. 
7. When it is appropriate that an animal’s life be terminated, psychologists proceed rapidly, with an 
effort to minimize pain and in accordance with accepted procedures. 
8.10 Reporting Research Results 
5. Psychologists do not fabricate data. (See also Standard 5.01a, Avoidance of False or Deceptive 
Statements.) 
6. If psychologists discover significant errors in their published data, they take reasonable steps to 
correct such errors in a correction, retraction, erratum, or other appropriate publication means. 
8.11 Plagiarism 
Psychologists do not present portions of another’s work or data as their own, even if the other work or data 
source is cited occasionally. 
8.12 Publication Credit 
8. Psychologists take responsibility and credit, including authorship credit, only for work they have 
actually performed or to which they have substantially contributed. (See also Standard 8.12b, 
Publication Credit.) 
9. Principal authorship and other publication credits accurately reflect the relative scientific or 
professional contributions of the individuals involved, regardless of their relative status. Mere 
possession of an institutional position, such as department chair, does not justify authorship credit. 
Minor contributions to the research or to the writing for publications are acknowledged 
From Moral Principles to Ethics Codes  |  69appropriately, such as in footnotes or in an introductory statement. 
10. Except under exceptional circumstances, a student is listed as principal author on any multiple-
authored article that is substantially based on the student’s doctoral dissertation. Faculty advisors 
discuss publication credit with students as early as feasible and throughout the research and 
publication process as appropriate. (See also Standard 8.12b, Publication Credit.) 
8.13 Duplicate Publication of Data 
Psychologists do not publish, as original data, data that have been previously published. This does not 
preclude republishing data when they are accompanied by proper acknowledgment. 
8.14 Sharing Research Data for Verification 
1. After research results are published, psychologists do not withhold the data on which their 
conclusions are based from other competent professionals who seek to verify the substantive claims 
through reanalysis and who intend to use such data only for that purpose, provided that the 
confidentiality of the participants can be protected and unless legal rights concerning proprietary 
data preclude their release. This does not preclude psychologists from requiring that such individuals 
or groups be responsible for costs associated with the provision of such information. 
2. Psychologists who request data from other psychologists to verify the substantive claims through 
reanalysis may use shared data only for the declared purpose. Requesting psychologists obtain prior 
written agreement for all other uses of the data. 
8.15 Reviewers 
Psychologists who review material submitted for presentation, publication, grant, or research proposal 
review respect the confidentiality of and the proprietary rights in such information of those who submitted 
it. 
Source: You can read the full APA Ethics Code at http://www.apa.org/ethics/code/index.aspx. 
Informed Consent 
Standards 8. 02 to 8. 05 ar e about inf ormed c onsent. Again, inf ormed c onsent me ans obtaining and 
documenting people’s agreement to participate in a stud y, having informed them of everything that might 
reasonably be expected to affect their decision. This includes details of the procedure, the risks and benefits 
of the r esearch, the fac t that they have the rig ht to de cline to par ticipate or to wi thdraw from the stud y, 
the c onsequences o f doing so, and an y legal limi ts to c onfidentiality. F or e xample, some sta tes r equire 
researchers who learn of child abuse or other crimes to report this information to authorities. 
Although the pr ocess o f obtaining inf ormed c onsent o ften in volves ha ving par ticipants r ead and sign 
a consent form, i t is impor tant to understand tha t this is not all i t is. Althoug h having par ticipants read 
and sign a c onsent form might be enoug h when they are competent adults wi th the necessary ability and 
motivation, many participants do not actually read consent forms or read them but do not understand them. 
70  |  From Moral Principles to Ethics CodesFor example, participants often mistake consent forms for legal documents and mistakenly believe that by 
signing them the y g ive up their rig ht to sue the r esearcher (Mann, 1994 ).1 Even wi th c ompetent adults, 
therefore, it is g ood practice to tell par ticipants about the risks and benefi ts, demonstrate the procedure, 
ask them if the y have questions, and r emind them o f their rig ht to wi thdraw at any time—in addi tion to 
having them read and sign a consent form. 
Note also that there are situations in which informed consent is not necessary. These include situations in 
which the research is not expected to cause any harm and the procedure is straightforward or the study is 
conducted in the c ontext of people’s ordinary activities. For example, if you wanted to si t outside a public 
building and obser ve whether people hold the door open f or people behind them, y ou would not ne ed to 
obtain their informed consent. Similarly, if a college instructor wanted to compare two legitimate teaching 
methods across two sections of his research methods course, he would not need to obtain informed consent 
from his students. 
Deception 
Deception of participants in psychological research can take a variety of forms: misinforming participants 
about the purpose o f a stud y, using c onfederates, using phon y equipment like Milgram’s shock g enerator, 
and presenting participants with false feedback about their performance (e.g., telling them they did poorly 
on a test when they actually did well). Deception also includes not informing participants of the full design 
or true purpose o f the r esearch even if the y are not ac tively misinformed (Sieber, Iannuzzo, & R odriguez, 
1995).2 For example, a study on incidental learning—learning without conscious effort—might involve having 
participants read through a list of words in preparation for a “memory test” later. Although participants are 
likely to assume that the memory test will require them to recall the words, it might instead require them to 
recall the contents of the room or the appearance of the research assistant. 
Some researchers have argued that deception of research participants is r arely if e ver ethically justified. 
Among their arguments are that it prevents participants from giving truly informed consent, fails to respect 
their dignity as human beings, has the poten tial to upse t them, mak es them distrustful and ther efore less 
honest in their responding, and damages the reputation of researchers in the field (Baumrind, 1985).3 
Note, however, that the AP A Ethics Code tak es a mor e moderate approach—allowing deception when the 
benefits o f the stud y out weigh the risks, par ticipants c annot r easonably be e xpected to be harme d, the 
research question cannot be answered without the use o f deception, and par ticipants are informed about 
the deception as soon as possi ble. This approach acknowledges that not all f orms of deception are equally 
bad. Compare, for example, Milgram’s study in which he deceived his participants in several significant ways 
that resulted in their experiencing severe psychological stress with an incidental learning study in which a 
“memory test” turns out to be slightly different from what participants were expecting. It also acknowledges 
that some scientifically and socially important research questions can be dif ficult or impossi ble to answer 
without deceiving participants. Knowing that a study concerns the extent to which they obey authority, act 
aggressively toward a peer, or help a str anger is likely to change the way people behave so that the results 
no longer generalize to the real world. 
From Moral Principles to Ethics Codes  |  71Debriefing 
Standard 8.08 is about debriefing. This is the process of informing research participants as soon as possible 
of the purpose o f the study, revealing any deception, and correcting any other misconceptions they might 
have as a r esult of participating. Debriefing also in volves minimizing harm tha t might have occurred. For 
example, an experiment on the effects of being in a sad mood on memory might involve inducing a sad mood 
in participants by having them think sad thoughts, watch a sad video, and/or listen to sad music. Debriefing 
would be the time to r eturn participants’ moods to normal b y having them think happ y thoughts, watch a 
happy video, or listen to happy music. 
Nonhuman Animal Subjects 
Standard 8. 09 is about the humane tr eatment and c are o f nonhuman animal subje cts. Althoug h most 
contemporary research in psychology does not involve nonhuman animal subjects, a significant minority of 
it does—especially in the study of learning and conditioning, behavioral neuroscience, and the development 
of drug and surgical therapies for psychological disorders. 
The use o f nonhuman animal subje cts in psy chological research is similar to the use o f deception in tha t 
there are those who ar gue that i t is r arely, if e ver, ethically ac ceptable (Bowd & Shapir o, 1993).4 Clearly, 
nonhuman animals ar e inc apable o f g iving inf ormed c onsent. Y et the y c an be subje cted to numer ous 
procedures tha t ar e lik ely to c ause them suf fering. The y c an be c onfined, depriv ed o f f ood and w ater, 
subjected to pain, oper ated on, and ultima tely euthanized. (Of course, they can also be obser ved benignly 
in na tural or z oo-like se ttings.) Others poin t out tha t psy chological r esearch on nonhuman animals has 
resulted in many important benefits to humans, including the development of behavioral therapies for many 
disorders, more effective pain control methods, and antipsychotic drugs (Miller, 1985).5 It has also resulted 
in benefits to nonhuman animals, including alterna tives to shooting and poisoning as me ans of controlling 
them. 
As with deception, the APA acknowledges that the benefits of research on nonhuman animals can outweigh 
the costs, in which case it is ethically acceptable. However, researchers must use alternative methods when 
they c an. W hen the y c annot, the y must ac quire and c are f or their subje cts humanel y and minimiz e the 
harm to them. F or more information on the AP A’s position on nonhuman animal subje cts, see the w ebsite 
of the AP A’s Commi ttee on Animal R esearch and E thics ( http://www.apa.org/science/leadership/care/
index.aspx). 
Scholarly Integrity 
Standards 8.10 to 8.15 ar e about scholar ly in tegrity. These include the ob vious poin ts tha t r esearchers 
must not fabric ate da ta or plag iarize. P lagiarism me ans using others’ w ords or ide as wi thout pr oper 
72  |  From Moral Principles to Ethics Codesacknowledgment. Pr oper ackno wledgment g enerally me ans indic ating dir ect quota tions wi th quota tion 
marks and providing a citation to the source of any quotation or idea used. Self-plagiarism is also considered 
unethical and r efers to publishing the same ma terial more than onc e. In other w ords, researchers should 
not borrow prior phr asing from their other publishe d works, just as studen ts should not submi t the same 
work to more than one class. 
The r emaining standar ds mak e some less ob vious but e qually impor tant poin ts. R esearchers should not 
publish the same da ta a se cond time as thoug h i t w ere ne w, the y should shar e their da ta wi th other 
researchers, and as pe er reviewers, they should k eep the unpublishe d research they review confidential. 
Note that the authors’ names on publishe d research—and the order in which those names appe ar—should 
reflect the importance of each person’s contribution to the research. It would be unethical, for example, to 
include as an author someone who had made only minor contributions to the research (e.g., analyzing some 
of the data) or for a faculty member to make himself or herself the first author on research that was largely 
conducted by a student. 
Notes 
1. Mann, T. (1994). Informed consent for psychological research: Do subjects comprehend consent forms and understand 
their legal rights? Psychological Science, 5, 140–143. 
2. Sieber, J. E., Iannuzzo, R., & Rodriguez, B. (1995). Deception methods in psychology: Have they changed in 23 
years? Ethics & Behavior, 5, 67–85. 
3. Baumrind, D. (1985). Research using intentional deception: Ethical issues revisited. American Psychologist, 40, 165–174. 
4. Bowd, A. D., & Shapiro, K. J. (1993). The case against animal laboratory research in psychology. Journal of Social Issues, 
49, 133–142. 
5. Miller, N. E. (1985). The value of behavioral research on animals. American Psychologist, 40, 423–440. 
From Moral Principles to Ethics Codes  |  7317.  Putting Ethics Into Practice 
Learning Objectives 
1. Describe several strategies for identifying and minimizing risks and deception in psychological research. 
2. Create thorough informed consent and debriefing procedures, including a consent form. 
 
In this section, we look at some practical advice for conducting ethical research in psychology. Again, i t is 
important to remember that ethical issues arise well before you begin to collect data and continue to arise 
through publication and beyond. 
Know and Accept Your Ethical Responsibilities 
As the American Psychological Association (APA) Ethics Code notes in its introduction, “Lack of awareness or 
misunderstanding of an ethical standard is not itself a defense to a charge of unethical conduct.” This is why 
the very first thing that you must do as a new researcher is to know and accept your ethical responsibilities. 
At a minimum, this me ans r eading and understanding the r elevant se ctions o f the AP A E thics Code, 
distinguishing minimal risk from at-risk research, and knowing the specific policies and procedures of your 
institution—including how to pr epare and submi t a r esearch protocol for institutional review board (IRB) 
review. If you are conducting research as a c ourse requirement, there may be spe cific course standards, 
policies, and pr ocedures. If any standard, policy, or pr ocedure is uncle ar—or you are unsure what to do 
about an e thical issue tha t arises—you must se ek clarification. You can do this b y reviewing the r elevant 
ethics c odes, r eading about ho w similar issues ha ve be en r esolved b y others, or c onsulting wi th mor e 
experienced researchers, your IRB, or y our course instructor. Ultimately, you as the r esearcher must tak e 
responsibility for the ethics of the research you conduct. 
Identify and Minimize Risks 
As you design your study, you must identify and minimize risks to participants. Start by listing all the risks, 
including risks o f ph ysical and psy chological harm and viola tions o f c onfidentiality. R emember tha t i t is 
easy for researchers to see risks as less serious than par ticipants do or e ven to overlook them completely. 
For example, one student researcher wanted to test people’s sensitivity to violent images by showing them 
gruesome photographs of crime and ac cident scenes. Because she w as an emer gency medical technician, 
74  |  Putting Ethics Into Practicehowever, she greatly underestimated how disturbing these images were to most people. Remember too that 
some risks might apply only to some par ticipants. For example, while most pe ople would have no problem 
completing a survey about their fear of various crimes, those who have been a victim of one of those crimes 
might become upset. This is wh y you should se ek input fr om a v ariety of people, including y our research 
collaborators, more experienced researchers, and e ven from nonresearchers who mig ht be be tter able to 
take the perspective of a participant. 
Once you have identified the risks, you can often reduce or eliminate many of them. One way is to modify the 
research design. For example, you might be able to shor ten or simplify the procedure to prevent boredom 
and frustration. You might be able to replace upsetting or offensive stimulus materials (e.g., graphic accident 
scene photos) with less upsetting or offensive ones (e.g., milder photos o f the sort people are likely to see 
in the newspaper). A good example of modifying a research design is a 2009 r eplication of Milgram’s study 
conducted by Jerry Burger. Instead of allowing his participants to continue administering shocks up to the 
450-V maximum, the r esearcher always stopped the pr ocedure when the y were about to administer the 
150-V shock (B urger, 2009).1 This made sense be cause in Milgr am’s study (a) participants’ severe negative 
reactions occurred after this point and (b) most participants who administered the 150-V shock continued all 
the way to the 450-V maximum. Thus the researcher was able to compare his results directly with Milgram’s 
at every point up to the 150-V shock and also was able to estimate how many of his participants would have 
continued to the maximum—but without subjecting them to the severe stress that Milgram did. (The results, 
by the way, were that these contemporary participants were just as obedient as Milgram’s were.) 
A second way to minimize risks is to use a  pre-screening procedure to identify and eliminate participants 
who ar e a t hig h risk. Y ou c an do this in par t thr ough the inf ormed c onsent pr ocess. F or e xample, y ou 
can w arn par ticipants tha t a sur vey includes questions about their f ear o f crime and r emind them tha t 
they ar e fr ee to wi thdraw if the y think this mig ht upse t them. Pr escreening c an also in volve c ollecting 
data to identify and eliminate participants. For example, Burger used an extensive pre-screening procedure 
involving multiple questionnair es and an in terview wi th a clinic al psy chologist to iden tify and elimina te 
participants with physical or psychological problems that put them at high risk. 
A third way to minimiz e risks is to tak e active steps to main tain confidentiality. You should k eep signed 
consent forms separately from any data that you collect and in such a way that no individual’s name can be 
linked to their data. In addition, beyond people’s sex and age, you should only collect personal information 
that you actually need to answ er your research question. I f people’s sexual orientation or e thnicity is not 
clearly relevant to your research question, f or example, then do not ask them about i t. Be aware also tha t 
certain data collection procedures can lead to unintentional violations of confidentiality. When participants 
respond to an or al sur vey in a shopping mall or c omplete a questionnair e in a classr oom se tting, i t is 
possible that their responses will be overheard or seen by others. If the responses are personal, it is better 
to administer the sur vey or questionnaire individually in private or to use other te chniques to prevent the 
unintentional sharing of personal information. 
Putting Ethics Into Practice  |  75Identify and Minimize Deception 
Remember tha t de ception c an tak e a v ariety o f f orms, not all o f which in volve ac tively misle ading 
participants. It is also deceptive to allow participants to make incorrect assumptions (e.g., about what will be 
on a “memory test”) or simply withhold information about the full design or purpose o f the study. It is best 
to identify and minimize all forms of deception. 
Remember that according to the APA Ethics Code, deception is ethically acceptable only if there is no way 
to answer your research question without it. Therefore, if your research design includes any form of active 
deception, you should consider whether it is truly necessary. Imagine, for example, that you want to know 
whether the age of college professors affects students’ expectations about their teaching ability. You could 
do this by telling participants that you will show them photos of college professors and ask them to rate each 
one’s teaching ability. But if the photos are not really of college professors but of your own family members 
and friends, then this w ould be de ception. This de ception could easily be elimina ted, however, by telling 
participants instead to imagine that the photos are of college professors and to rate them as if they were. 
In general, it is considered acceptable to wait until debriefing before you reveal your research question as 
long as you describe the procedure, risks, and benefi ts during the informed consent process. For example, 
you w ould not ha ve to tell par ticipants tha t y ou w anted to kno w whe ther the ag e o f c ollege pr ofessors 
affects people’s expectations about them un til the stud y was over. Not only is this inf ormation unlikely to 
affect people’s decision about whether or not to participate in the study, but it has the potential to invalidate 
the results. Participants who kno w that age is the independen t variable might rate the older and y ounger 
“professors” differently because they think y ou want them to. Alterna tively, they might be c areful to r ate 
them the same so tha t the y do not appe ar pr ejudiced. B ut e ven this e xtremely mild f orm o f de ception 
can be minimized by informing participants—orally, in writing, or both—that although you have accurately 
described the procedure, risks, and benefi ts, you will wait to reveal the research question until afterward. 
In essence, participants give their consent to be deceived or to have information withheld from them until 
later. 
Weigh the Risks Against the Benefits 
Once the risks o f the r esearch ha ve be en iden tified and minimiz ed, y ou ne ed to w eigh them against 
the benefi ts. This r equires iden tifying all the benefi ts. R emember to c onsider benefi ts to the r esearch 
participants, to science, and to society. If you are a student researcher, remember that one of the benefits 
is the knowledge you will gain about how to conduct scientific research in psychology—knowledge you can 
then use to complete your studies and succeed in graduate school or in your career. 
If the research poses minimal risk—no more than in people’s daily lives or routine physical or psychological 
examinations—then even a small benefit to participants, science, or society is generally considered enough 
to justify it. If it poses more than minimal risk, then ther e should be mor e benefits. If the research has the 
potential to upse t some par ticipants, for example, then i t becomes more important that the stud y is w ell 
designed and can answer a scientifically interesting research question or have clear practical implications. 
76  |  Putting Ethics Into PracticeIt would be unethical to subject people to pain, fear, or embarrassment for no better reason than to satisfy 
one’s personal curiosity. In general, psychological research that has the potential to cause harm that is more 
than minor or lasts for more than a short time is rarely considered justified by its benefits. 
Create Informed Consent and Debriefing Procedures 
Once y ou ha ve se ttled on a r esearch design, y ou ne ed to cr eate y our inf ormed c onsent and debriefing 
procedures. S tart b y de ciding whe ther inf ormed c onsent is ne cessary ac cording to AP A S tandard 8. 05. 
If inf ormed c onsent is ne cessary, ther e ar e se veral things y ou should do. F irst, when y ou r ecruit 
participants—whether it is thr ough word of mouth, poste d advertisements, or a par ticipant pool—provide 
them with as much information about the study as you can. This will allow those who might find the study 
objectionable to avoid it. Second, prepare a script or set of “talking points” to help you explain the study to 
your participants in simple everyday language. This should include a description of the procedure, the risks 
and benefits, and their rig ht to wi thdraw at any time. Third, create an informed consent form that covers 
all the poin ts in S tandard 8.02a that participants can read and sign af ter you have described the stud y to 
them. Your university, department, or course instructor may have a sample consent form that you can adapt 
for your own study. If not, an I nternet search will turn up se veral samples. R emember that if appr opriate, 
both the oral and written parts of the informed consent process should include the fact that you are keeping 
some information about the design or purpose o f the stud y from them but tha t you will r eveal it during 
debriefing. 
Debriefing is similar to inf ormed consent in tha t you cannot necessarily expect participants to r ead and 
understand written debriefing f orms. So again i t is best to wri te a script or se t of talking poin ts with the 
goal o f being able to e xplain the stud y in simple, e veryday languag e. During the debriefing, y ou should 
reveal the r esearch question and full design o f the stud y. F or e xample, if par ticipants ar e teste d under 
only one c ondition, then y ou should e xplain what happened in the other c onditions. If you deceived your 
participants, you should r eveal this as soon as possi ble, apolog ize f or the de ception, e xplain wh y i t was 
necessary, and correct any misconceptions that participants might have as a result. Debriefing is also a good 
time to pr ovide additional benefits to r esearch participants by giving them r elevant practical information 
or referrals to other sources of help. For example, in a study of attitudes toward domestic abuse, you could 
provide pamphlets about domestic abuse and r eferral information to the univ ersity counseling center for 
those who might want it. 
Remember to schedule plenty of time for the informed consent and debriefing pr ocesses. They cannot be 
effective if you have to rush through them. 
Get Approval 
The next step is to get institutional approval for your research based on the specific policies and procedures 
at y our insti tution or f or y our c ourse. This will g enerally r equire wri ting a pr otocol tha t descri bes the 
Putting Ethics Into Practice  |  77purpose of the study, the research design and procedure, the risks and benefits, the steps taken to minimize 
risks, and the inf ormed c onsent and debriefing pr ocedures. Do not think o f the insti tutional appr oval 
process as mer ely an obstacle to o vercome but as an oppor tunity to think thr ough the e thics o f y our 
research and to c onsult with others who ar e likely to have more experience or different perspectives than 
you. If the IRB has questions or concerns about your research, address them promptly and in good faith. This 
might even mean making further modifications to your research design and procedure before resubmitting 
your protocol. 
Follow Through 
Your concern with ethics should not end when y our study receives institutional approval. It now becomes 
important to stick to the pr otocol you submitted or to se ek additional approval for anything other than a 
minor change. During the r esearch, you should moni tor your participants for unanticipated reactions and 
seek feedback from them during debriefing. One cri ticism of Milgram’s study is tha t althoug h he did not 
know ahead of time that his participants would have such severe negative reactions, he certainly knew after 
he had teste d the first se veral par ticipants and should ha ve made adjustmen ts a t tha t poin t (Ba umrind, 
1985).2 Be alert also for potential violations of confidentiality. Keep the consent forms and the data safe and 
separate from each other and mak e sure that no one, in tentionally or unin tentionally, has ac cess to an y 
participant’s personal information. 
Finally, you must maintain your integrity through the publication process and beyond. Address publication 
credit—who will be a uthors on the r esearch and the or der of authors—with your collaborators early and 
avoid plag iarism in y our writing. Remember that your scientific goal is to le arn about the w ay the w orld 
actually is and tha t y our scien tific dut y is to r eport on y our r esults honestl y and ac curately. So do not 
be tempte d to fabric ate da ta or alter y our r esults in an y w ay. Besides, une xpected r esults ar e o ften as 
interesting, or more so, than expected ones. 
Notes 
1. Burger, J. M. (2009). Replicating Milgram: Would people still obey today? American Psychologist, 64, 1–11. 
2. Baumrind, D. (1985). Research using intentional deception: Ethical issues revisited. American Psychologist, 40, 165–174. 
78  |  Putting Ethics Into Practice18.  Key Takeaways and Exercises 
 
Key Takeaways 
• A wide variety of ethical issues arise in psychological research. Thinking them through requires 
considering how each of four moral principles (weighing risks against benefits, acting responsibly and 
with integrity, seeking justice, and respecting people’s rights and dignity) applies to each of three groups 
of people (research participants, science, and society). 
• Ethical conflict in psychological research is unavoidable. Researchers must think through the ethical 
issues raised by their research, minimize the risks, weigh the risks against the benefits, be able to explain 
their ethical decisions, seek feedback about these decisions from others, and ultimately take 
responsibility for them. 
• There are several written ethics codes for research with human participants that provide specific 
guidance on the ethical issues that arise most frequently. These codes include the Nuremberg Code, the 
Declaration of Helsinki, the Belmont Report, and the Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects. 
• The APA Ethics Code is the most important ethics code for researchers in psychology. It includes many 
standards that are relevant mainly to clinical practice, but Standard 8 concerns informed consent, 
deception, debriefing, the use of nonhuman animal subjects, and scholarly integrity in research. 
• Research conducted at universities, hospitals, and other institutions that receive support from the 
federal government must be reviewed by an institutional review board (IRB)—a committee at the 
institution that reviews research protocols to make sure they conform to ethical standards. 
• Informed consent is the process of obtaining and documenting people’s agreement to participate in a 
study, having informed them of everything that might reasonably be expected to affect their decision. 
Although it often involves having them read and sign a consent form, it is not equivalent to reading and 
signing a consent form. 
• Although some researchers argue that deception of research participants is never ethically justified, the 
APA Ethics Code allows for its use when the benefits of using it outweigh the risks, participants cannot 
reasonably be expected to be harmed, there is no way to conduct the study without deception, and 
participants are informed of the deception as soon as possible. 
• It is your responsibility as a researcher to know and accept your ethical responsibilities. 
• You can take several concrete steps to minimize risks and deception in your research. These include 
making changes to your research design, prescreening to identify and eliminate high-risk participants, 
and providing participants with as much information as possible during informed consent and debriefing. 
• Your ethical responsibilities continue beyond IRB approval. You need to monitor participants’ reactions, 
be alert for potential violations of confidentiality, and maintain scholarly integrity through the publication 
process. 
Key Takeaways and Exercises  |  79