CHAPTER  X 
SINGLE-SUBJECT RESEARCH 
Researcher Vance Hall and his colleagues were faced with the challenge of increasing the extent to which six 
disruptive elementary school students stayed focused on their schoolwork (Hall, Lund, & Jackson, 1968)1. For 
each of several days, the researchers carefully recorded whether or not each student was doing schoolwork 
every 10 se conds during a 30-minute period. Onc e they had establishe d this baseline, the y introduced a 
treatment. The tr eatment was that when the studen t was doing school work, the te acher gave him or her 
positive attention in the f orm of a comment like “good work” or a pa t on the shoulder. The result was that 
all of the studen ts dramatically increased their time spen t on school work and de creased their disruptiv e 
behavior during this treatment phase. For example, a student named Robbie originally spent 25% of his time 
on schoolwork and the other 75% “snapping rubber bands, playing with toys from his pocket, and talking and 
laughing with peers” (p. 3). During the treatment phase, however, he spent 71% of his time on schoolwork and 
only 29% on other activities. Finally, when the researchers had the teacher stop giving positive attention, the 
students all decreased their studying and increased their disruptive behavior. This confirmed that it was, in 
fact, the positive attention that was responsible for the increase in studying. This was one of the first studies 
to show that attending to positive behavior—and ignoring negative behavior—could be a quick and effective 
way to deal with problem behavior in an applied setting. 
Most of this textbook is about what can be called group research, which typically involves studying a large 
number of participants and combining their data to draw general conclusions about human beha vior. The 
study b y H all and his c olleagues, in c ontrast, is an e xample o f sing le-subject r esearch, which t ypically 
involves studying a small number of participants and focusing closely on each individual. In this chapter, we 
consider this alterna tive approach. We begin with an o verview of single-subject research, including some 
assumptions on which i t is base d, who c onducts it, and wh y they do. W e then look a t some basic sing le-
subject research designs and how the data from those designs are analyzed. Finally, we consider some of the 
strengths and weaknesses of single-subject research as compared with group research and see how these 
two approaches can complement each other. 
Notes 
1. Hall, R. V., Lund, D., & Jackson, D. (1968). Effects of teacher attention on study behavior. Journal of Applied Behavior 
Analysis, 1, 1–12. 
Single-Subject Research  |  23944.  Overview of Single-Subject Research 
Learning Objectives 
1. Explain what single-subject research is, including how it differs from other types of psychological 
research. 
2. Explain who uses single-subject research and why. 
What Is Single-Subject Research? 
Single-subject research is a t ype of quantitative research that involves studying in de tail the beha vior of 
each o f a small number o f par ticipants. N ote tha t the term  single-subject does not me an tha t onl y one 
participant is studie d; i t is mor e t ypical f or ther e to be some where be tween t wo and 10 par ticipants. 
(This is why single-subject research designs are sometimes called small-n designs, where n is the statistical 
symbol for the sample size.) Single-subject research can be contrasted with group research, which typically 
involves studying large numbers o f participants and e xamining their beha vior primarily in terms o f group 
means, standard deviations, and so on. The majori ty of this te xtbook is de voted to understanding gr oup 
research, which is the most c ommon approach in psychology. But single-subject research is an impor tant 
alternative, and it is the primary approach in some more applied areas of psychology. 
Before continuing, it is important to distinguish sing le-subject research from case studies and other mor e 
qualitative approaches that involve studying in detail a small number of participants. As described in Chapter 
6, c ase studies in volve an in-depth anal ysis and description o f an individual, which is t ypically primarily 
qualitative in na ture. M ore br oadly spe aking, quali tative r esearch f ocuses on understanding pe ople’s 
subjective e xperience b y obser ving beha vior and c ollecting r elatively unstruc tured da ta ( e.g., de tailed 
interviews) and anal yzing those da ta using narr ative r ather than quan titative te chniques. S ingle-subject 
research, in contrast, focuses on understanding objective behavior through experimental manipulation and 
control, collecting highly structured data, and analyzing those data quantitatively. 
Assumptions of Single-Subject Research 
Again, single-subject research involves studying a small number of participants and focusing intensively on 
the behavior of each one. B ut why take this appr oach instead of the gr oup approach? There are several 
important assumptions underlying single-subject research, and it will help to consider them now. 
Overview of Single-Subject Research  |  241First and foremost is the assumption tha t it is important to focus intensively on the beha vior of individual 
participants. One reason for this is that group research can hide individual differences and generate results 
that do not r epresent the beha vior of any individual. F or example, a tr eatment that has a posi tive ef fect 
for half the pe ople exposed to it but a nega tive effect for the other half w ould, on average, appear to have 
no effect at all. Single-subject research, however, would likely reveal these individual differences. A second 
reason to focus intensively on individuals is that sometimes it is the behavior of a particular individual that 
is primarily of interest. A school psy chologist, for example, might be in terested in chang ing the beha vior 
of a par ticular disruptiv e studen t. Althoug h pr evious publishe d r esearch (both sing le-subject and gr oup 
research) is likely to provide some guidance on how to do this, conducting a study on this student would be 
more direct and probably more effective. 
A se cond assumption o f sing le-subject r esearch is tha t i t is impor tant to disc over c ausal r elationships 
through the manipulation of an independent variable, the careful measurement of a dependent variable, and 
the control of extraneous variables. For this r eason, single-subject research is o ften considered a t ype of 
experimental research with good internal validity. Recall, for example, that Hall and his colleagues measured 
their dependent variable (studying) many times—first under a no-treatment control condition, then under a 
treatment condition (positive teacher attention), and then again under the control condition. Because there 
was a cle ar incr ease in stud ying when the tr eatment w as in troduced, a de crease when i t w as r emoved, 
and an incr ease when i t was reintroduced, there is li ttle doubt tha t the tr eatment was the c ause of the 
improvement. 
A third assumption of single-subject research is that it is important to study strong and consistent effects 
that have biolog ical or social impor tance. Applied researchers, in par ticular, are interested in tr eatments 
that have substantial effects on important behaviors and that can be implemented reliably in the real-world 
contexts in which they occur. This is sometimes referred to as social validity (Wolf, 1976)1. The study by Hall 
and his colleagues, for example, had good social validity because it showed strong and consistent effects of 
positive teacher attention on a beha vior that is o f obvious importance to te achers, parents, and studen ts. 
Furthermore, the teachers found the treatment easy to implement, even in their often-chaotic elementary 
school classrooms. 
Who Uses Single-Subject Research? 
Single-subject r esearch has be en ar ound as long as the field o f psy chology i tself. I n the la te 1800s, one 
of psy chology’s f ounders, W ilhelm W undt, studie d sensa tion and c onsciousness b y f ocusing in tensively 
on each of a small number o f research participants. Herman Ebbing haus’s research on memor y and I van 
Pavlov’s research on classic al conditioning are other e arly examples, both o f which ar e still descri bed in 
almost every introductory psychology textbook. 
In the middle of the 20th century, B. F. Skinner clarified many of the assumptions underlying single-subject 
research and r efined man y o f i ts te chniques ( Skinner, 1938 )2. H e and other r esearchers then use d i t to 
describe how rewards, punishments, and other e xternal factors affect behavior over time. This w ork was 
carried out primaril y using nonhuman subje cts—mostly r ats and pig eons. This appr oach, which Skinner 
242  |  Overview of Single-Subject Researchcalled the experimental analysis of behavior—remains an impor tant subfield of psychology and continues 
to rely almost exclusively on single-subject research. For excellent examples of this work, look at any issue 
of the  Journal of the Experimental A nalysis of Behavior . B y the 1960s, man y r esearchers w ere in terested 
in using this appr oach to c onduct applied research primarily with humans—a sub field now called applied 
behavior analysis (Baer, Wolf, & Risley, 1968)3. Applied behavior analysis plays an especially important role 
in c ontemporary r esearch on de velopmental disabili ties, e ducation, or ganizational beha vior, and he alth, 
among many other ar eas. Excellent examples of this w ork (including the stud y by Hall and his c olleagues) 
can be found in the Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis. 
Although most contemporary single-subject research is conducted from the behavioral perspective, it can 
in principle be use d to addr ess questions fr amed in terms o f any theoretical perspective. For example, a 
studying te chnique base d on c ognitive principles o f le arning and memor y c ould be e valuated by testing 
it on individual hig h school studen ts using the sing le-subject approach. The sing le-subject approach can 
also be use d by clinicians who tak e any theoretical perspective—behavioral, cognitive, psychodynamic, or 
humanistic—to study processes of therapeutic change with individual clients and to document their clients’ 
improvement (Kazdin, 1982)4. 
Notes 
1. Wolf, M. (1976). Social validity: The case for subjective measurement or how applied behavior analysis is finding its 
heart. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 11, 203–214. 
2. Skinner, B. F. (1938). The behavior of organisms: An experimental analysis. New York, NY: Appleton-Century-Crofts. 
3. Baer, D. M., Wolf, M. M., & Risley, T. R. (1968). Some current dimensions of applied behavior analysis. Journal of Applied 
Behavior Analysis, 1, 91–97. 
4. Kazdin, A. E. (1982). Single-case research designs: Methods for clinical and applied settings. New York, NY: Oxford 
University Press. 
Overview of Single-Subject Research  |  24345.  Single-Subject Research Designs 
Learning Objectives 
1. Describe the basic elements of a single-subject research design. 
2. Design simple single-subject studies using reversal and multiple-baseline designs. 
3. Explain how single-subject research designs address the issue of internal validity. 
4. Interpret the results of simple single-subject studies based on the visual inspection of graphed data. 
General Features of Single-Subject Designs 
Before looking a t any specific single-subject research designs, i t will be help ful to c onsider some f eatures 
that are common to most o f them. Man y of these f eatures are illustrated in Figure 10.1, which sho ws the 
results o f a g eneric sing le-subject stud y. F irst, the dependen t v ariable (represented on the  y-axis o f the 
graph) is measured repeatedly over time (represented by the x-axis) at regular intervals. Second, the study 
is divided into distinct phases, and the participant is tested under one condition per phase. The conditions 
are often designated by capital letters: A, B, C, and so on. Thus  Figure 10.1 represents a design in which the 
participant was tested first in one condition (A), then tested in another condition (B), and finally retested in 
the original condition (A). (This is called a reversal design and will be discussed in more detail shortly.) 
Figure 10.1 Results of a Generic Single-Subject Study Illustrating Several Principles of Single-Subject Research 
244  |  Single-Subject Research DesignsAnother impor tant aspe ct o f sing le-subject r esearch is tha t the chang e fr om one c ondition to the ne xt 
does not usually occur after a fixed amount of time or number o f observations. Instead, it depends on the 
participant’s beha vior. S pecifically, the r esearcher w aits un til the par ticipant’s beha vior in one c ondition 
becomes fairly consistent from observation to obser vation before changing conditions. This is some times 
referred to as the steady state strategy (Sidman, 1960)1. The ide a is tha t when the dependen t variable has 
reached a ste ady state, then an y change across conditions will be r elatively easy to de tect. Recall that we 
encountered this same principle when discussing e xperimental research more generally. The ef fect of an 
independent variable is easier to detect when the “noise” in the data is minimized. 
Reversal Designs 
The most basic single-subject research design is the reversal design, also called the ABA design. During the 
first phase, A, a baseline is established for the dependent variable. This is the level of responding before any 
treatment is introduced, and therefore the baseline phase is a kind o f control condition. When steady state 
responding is reached, phase B beg ins as the r esearcher introduces the treatment. There may be a period 
of adjustment to the treatment during which the behavior of interest becomes more variable and begins to 
increase or decrease. Again, the researcher waits until that dependent variable reaches a steady state so that 
it is clear whether and how much it has changed. Finally, the researcher removes the treatment and again 
waits until the dependen t variable reaches a ste ady state. This basic r eversal design c an also be e xtended 
with the reintroduction of the treatment (ABAB), another return to baseline (ABABA), and so on. 
The study by Hall and his c olleagues employed an ABAB reversal design. Figure 10.2 approximates the data 
for R obbie. The per centage o f time he spen t stud ying ( the dependen t v ariable) w as lo w during the first 
baseline phase, increased during the first treatment phase until it leveled off, decreased during the second 
baseline phase, and again increased during the second treatment phase. 
Single-Subject Research Designs  |  245Figure 10.2 An Approximation of the Results for Hall and Colleagues’ Participant Robbie in Their ABAB Reversal Design. 
[Image description] 
Why is the reversal—the removal of the treatment—considered to be necessary in this type of design? Why 
use an ABA design, for example, rather than a simpler AB design ? Notice that an AB design is essen tially an 
interrupted time-series design applied to an individual participant. Recall that one problem with that design 
is that if the dependen t variable changes after the tr eatment is in troduced, it is not al ways clear that the 
treatment was responsible for the chang e. It is possi ble that something else chang ed at around the same 
time and tha t this e xtraneous variable is r esponsible for the chang e in the dependen t variable. But if the 
dependent variable changes with the introduction of the treatment and then changes back with the removal 
of the treatment (assuming that the treatment does not cr eate a permanent effect), it is much cle arer that 
the treatment (and removal of the treatment) is the cause. In other words, the reversal greatly increases the 
internal validity of the study. 
There ar e close r elatives o f the basic r eversal design tha t allo w f or the e valuation o f mor e than one 
treatment. I n a  multiple-treatment reversal design, a baseline phase is f ollowed b y separ ate phases in 
which different treatments are introduced. For example, a researcher might establish a baseline of studying 
behavior f or a disruptiv e studen t ( A), then in troduce a tr eatment in volving posi tive a ttention fr om the 
teacher (B), and then switch to a treatment involving mild punishment for not studying (C). The participant 
could then be r eturned to a baseline phase bef ore reintroducing each treatment—perhaps in the r everse 
order as a way of controlling for carryover effects. This particular multiple-treatment reversal design could 
also be referred to as an ABCACB design. 
In an alternating treatments design, two or more treatments are alternated relatively quickly on a regular 
schedule. For example, positive attention for studying could be used one day and mild punishment for not 
studying the ne xt, and so on. Or one tr eatment could be implemen ted in the morning and another in the 
246  |  Single-Subject Research Designsafternoon. The alternating treatments design can be a quick and effective way of comparing treatments, but 
only when the treatments are fast acting. 
Multiple-Baseline Designs 
There are two potential problems with the reversal design—both of which have to do with the removal of the 
treatment. One is that if a treatment is working, it may be unethical to remove it. For example, if a treatment 
seemed to r educe the incidenc e of self-injury in a child wi th an in tellectual delay, i t would be une thical 
to remove that treatment just to sho w that the incidenc e of self-injury increases. The se cond problem is 
that the dependent variable may not return to baseline when the treatment is removed. For example, when 
positive attention for studying is removed, a student might continue to study at an increased rate. This could 
mean that the posi tive attention had a lasting ef fect on the studen t’s studying, which o f course would be 
good. But it could also mean that the positive attention was not really the cause of the increased studying 
in the first place. Perhaps something else happened at about the same time as the tr eatment—for example, 
the student’s parents might have started rewarding him f or good grades. One solution to these pr oblems 
is to use a multiple-baseline design, which is represented in Figure 10.3. There are three different types of 
multiple-baseline designs which we will now consider. 
Multiple-Baseline Design Across Participants 
In one v ersion of the design, a baseline is establishe d for each of several participants, and the tr eatment 
is then in troduced f or e ach one. I n essenc e, e ach par ticipant is teste d in an AB design. The k ey to this 
design is tha t the tr eatment is in troduced at a dif ferent time for each par ticipant. The ide a is tha t if the 
dependent variable changes when the treatment is introduced for one participant, it might be a coincidence. 
But if the dependent variable changes when the treatment is introduced for multiple participants—especially 
when the treatment is introduced at different times for the different participants—then it is unlikely to be a 
coincidence. 
Single-Subject Research Designs  |  247Figure 10.3 Results of a Generic Multiple-Baseline Study. The multiple baselines can be for different participants, 
dependent variables, or settings. The treatment is introduced at a different time on each baseline. [Image description] 
248  |  Single-Subject Research DesignsAs an e xample, c onsider a stud y b y Sc ott R oss and R obert H orner (R oss & H orner, 2009 )2. The y w ere 
interested in ho w a school-wide bull ying prevention program affected the bull ying behavior of particular 
problem studen ts. A t e ach o f thr ee dif ferent schools, the r esearchers studie d t wo studen ts who had 
regularly engaged in bullying. During the baseline phase, they observed the students for 10-minute periods 
each day during lunch recess and counted the number of aggressive behaviors they exhibited toward their 
peers. After 2 weeks, they implemented the program at one school. After 2 more weeks, they implemented 
it a t the se cond school. And af ter 2 mor e w eeks, the y implemen ted i t a t the thir d school. The y f ound 
that the number of aggressive behaviors exhibited by each student dropped shortly after the program was 
implemented at the student’s school. Notice that if the r esearchers had only studied one school or if the y 
had introduced the treatment at the same time a t all three schools, then i t would be uncle ar whether the 
reduction in aggressive behaviors was due to the bullying program or something else that happened at about 
the same time i t was introduced (e.g., a holida y, a tele vision program, a chang e in the w eather). But with 
their multiple-baseline design, this kind of coincidence would have to happen three separate times—a very 
unlikely occurrence—to explain their results. 
Multiple-Baseline Design Across Behaviors 
In another v ersion of the multiple-baseline design, multiple baselines ar e establishe d f or the same 
participant but f or dif ferent dependen t v ariables, and the tr eatment is in troduced a t a dif ferent time 
for e ach dependen t v ariable. I magine, f or e xample, a stud y on the ef fect o f se tting cle ar g oals on the 
productivity of an office worker who has two primary tasks: making sales calls and writing reports. Baselines 
for both tasks c ould be establishe d. For example, the r esearcher could measure the number o f sales c alls 
made and r eports wri tten b y the w orker e ach w eek f or se veral w eeks. Then the g oal-setting tr eatment 
could be introduced for one of these tasks, and a t a later time the same tr eatment could be introduced for 
the other task. The log ic is the same as bef ore. If productivity increases on one task af ter the tr eatment 
is in troduced, i t is uncle ar whe ther the tr eatment c aused the incr ease. B ut if pr oductivity incr eases on 
both tasks after the treatment is introduced—especially when the treatment is introduced at two different 
times—then it seems much clearer that the treatment was responsible. 
Multiple-Baseline Design Across Settings 
In y et a thir d v ersion o f the multiple-baseline design, multiple baselines ar e establishe d f or the same 
participant but in dif ferent settings. For example, a baseline mig ht be established for the amount of time a 
child spends reading during his free time at school and during his free time at home. Then a treatment such 
as positive attention might be introduced first at school and later at home. Again, if the dependent variable 
changes after the treatment is introduced in each setting, then this gives the researcher confidence that the 
treatment is, in fact, responsible for the change. 
Single-Subject Research Designs  |  249Data Analysis in Single-Subject Research 
In addi tion to i ts focus on individual par ticipants, sing le-subject research differs from group research in 
the w ay the da ta ar e t ypically anal yzed. As w e ha ve se en thr oughout the book, gr oup r esearch in volves 
combining da ta acr oss par ticipants. Gr oup da ta ar e descri bed using sta tistics such as me ans, standar d 
deviations, correlation coefficients, and so on to de tect general patterns. Finally, inferential statistics are 
used to help de cide whe ther the r esult f or the sample is lik ely to g eneralize to the popula tion. S ingle-
subject r esearch, b y c ontrast, r elies he avily on a v ery dif ferent appr oach c alled visual inspection. This 
means plot ting individual par ticipants’ data as sho wn throughout this chapter , looking c arefully at those 
data, and making judgmen ts about whe ther and to wha t extent the independen t variable had an ef fect on 
the dependent variable. Inferential statistics are typically not used. 
In visually inspecting their data, single-subject researchers take several factors into account. One of them 
is changes in the level of the dependent variable from condition to condition. If the dependent variable is 
much higher or much lo wer in one c ondition than another, this suggests that the treatment had an ef fect. 
A second factor is trend, which r efers to gr adual increases or de creases in the dependen t variable across 
observations. If the dependen t variable begins increasing or de creasing with a chang e in c onditions, then 
again this sugg ests tha t the tr eatment had an ef fect. I t c an be espe cially telling when a tr end chang es 
directions—for e xample, when an un wanted beha vior is incr easing during baseline but then beg ins to 
decrease with the introduction of the treatment. A third factor is latency, which is the time i t takes for the 
dependent variable to begin changing after a change in conditions. In general, if a change in the dependent 
variable begins shortly after a change in conditions, this suggests that the treatment was responsible. 
In the top panel o f Figure 10.4, there are fairly obvious changes in the le vel and tr end of the dependen t 
variable from condition to c ondition. Furthermore, the la tencies of these chang es are shor t; the chang e 
happens immediately. This pattern of results strongly suggests that the treatment was responsible for the 
changes in the dependent variable. In the bottom panel of Figure 10.4, however, the changes in level are fairly 
small. And although there appears to be an increasing trend in the treatment condition, it looks as though it 
might be a continuation of a trend that had already begun during baseline. This pa ttern of results strongly 
suggests that the treatment was not responsible for any changes in the dependent variable—at least not to 
the extent that single-subject researchers typically hope to see. 
250  |  Single-Subject Research DesignsFigure 10.4 Results of a Generic Single-Subject Study Illustrating Level, Trend, and Latency. Visual inspection of the data 
suggests an effective treatment in the top panel but an ineffective treatment in the bottom panel. [Image description] 
The r esults o f sing le-subject r esearch c an also be anal yzed using sta tistical pr ocedures—and this is 
becoming more common. There are many different approaches, and sing le-subject researchers continue 
to deba te which ar e the most useful. One appr oach par allels wha t is t ypically done in gr oup r esearch. 
The mean and standard deviation of each participant’s responses under each condition are computed and 
Single-Subject Research Designs  |  251compared, and inferential statistical tests such as the t test or analysis of variance are applied (Fisch, 2001)3. 
(Note that averaging across participants is less common.) Another approach is to compute the percentage of 
non-overlapping data (PND) for each participant (Scruggs & Mastr opieri, 2001)4. This is the per centage of 
responses in the treatment condition that are more extreme than the most extreme response in a relevant 
control condition. In the study of Hall and his c olleagues, for example, all measures of Robbie’s study time 
in the first tr eatment condition were greater than the hig hest measure in the first baseline, f or a P ND of 
100%. The greater the percentage of non-overlapping data, the stronger the treatment effect. Still, formal 
statistical approaches to data analysis in single-subject research are generally considered a supplement to 
visual inspection, not a replacement for it. 
Image Description 
Figure 10.2 long description: Line graph showing the results of a study with an ABAB reversal design. The 
dependent v ariable w as lo w during first baseline phase; incr eased during the first tr eatment; de creased 
during the se cond baseline, but w as still hig her than during the first baseline; and w as highest during the 
second treatment phase. [Return to Figure 10.2] 
Figure 10.3 long description: Three line graphs showing the results of a generic multiple-baseline study, in 
which different baselines are established and treatment is introduced to participants at different times. 
For Baseline 1, treatment is introduced one-quarter of the way into the study. The dependent variable ranges 
between 12 and 16 units during the baseline, but drops down to 10 units with treatment and mostly decreases 
until the end of the study, ranging between 4 and 10 units. 
For Baseline 2, treatment is introduced halfway through the study. The dependent variable ranges between 
10 and 15 uni ts during the baseline, then has a sharp de crease to 7 uni ts when tr eatment is in troduced. 
However, the dependent variable increases to 12 units soon after the drop and ranges between 8 and 10 units 
until the end of the study. 
For Baseline 3, tr eatment is in troduced three-quarters of the w ay into the stud y. The dependen t variable 
ranges between 12 and 16 units for the most part during the baseline, with one drop down to 10 units. When 
treatment is introduced, the dependent variable drops down to 10 uni ts and then r anges between 8 and 9 
units until the end of the study. [Return to Figure 10.3] 
Figure 10.4 long description: Two graphs showing the results of a generic single-subject study with an ABA 
design. In the first gr aph, under c ondition A, le vel is hig h and the tr end is incr easing. Under c ondition B, 
level is much lo wer than under c ondition A and the tr end is de creasing. Under c ondition A again, le vel is 
about as high as the first time and the trend is increasing. For each change, latency is short, suggesting that 
the treatment is the reason for the change. 
In the second graph, under condition A, level is relatively low and the trend is increasing. Under condition B, 
level is a little higher than during condition A and the trend is increasing slightly. Under condition A again, 
level is a little lower than during condition B and the trend is decreasing slightly. It is difficult to determine 
252  |  Single-Subject Research Designsthe la tency o f these chang es, sinc e e ach chang e is r ather minute, which sugg ests tha t the tr eatment is 
ineffective. [Return to Figure 10.4] 
Notes 
1. Sidman, M. (1960). Tactics of scientific research: Evaluating experimental data in psychology. Boston, MA: Authors 
Cooperative. 
2. Ross, S. W., & Horner, R. H. (2009). Bully prevention in positive behavior support. Journal of Applied Behavior 
Analysis, 42, 747–759. 
3. Fisch, G. S. (2001). Evaluating data from behavioral analysis: Visual inspection or statistical models. Behavioral 
Processes, 54, 137–154. 
4. Scruggs, T. E., & Mastropieri, M. A. (2001). How to summarize single-participant research: Ideas and 
applications. Exceptionality, 9, 227–244. 
Single-Subject Research Designs  |  25346.  The Single-Subject Versus Group “Debate” 
Learning Objectives 
1. Explain some of the points of disagreement between advocates of single-subject research and advocates 
of group research. 
2. Identify several situations in which single-subject research would be appropriate and several others in 
which group research would be appropriate. 
 
Single-subject r esearch is similar to gr oup r esearch—especially e xperimental gr oup r esearch—in man y 
ways. The y ar e both quan titative appr oaches tha t tr y to establish c ausal r elationships b y manipula ting 
an independent variable, measuring a dependen t variable, and c ontrolling extraneous variables. But there 
are impor tant dif ferences be tween these appr oaches too, and these dif ferences some times le ad to 
disagreements. It is w orth addr essing the most c ommon poin ts o f disagr eement be tween sing le-subject 
researchers and gr oup researchers and ho w these disagr eements can be r esolved. As w e will se e, single-
subject research and group research are probably best conceptualized as complementary approaches. 
Data Analysis 
One se t o f disagr eements r evolves ar ound the issue o f da ta anal ysis. Some ad vocates o f gr oup r esearch 
worry that visual inspection is inadequate for deciding whether and to what extent a treatment has affected 
a dependen t v ariable. One spe cific c oncern is tha t visual inspe ction is not sensi tive enoug h to de tect 
weak ef fects. A se cond is tha t visual inspe ction c an be unr eliable, wi th dif ferent r esearchers r eaching 
different c onclusions about the same se t o f data (D anov & S ymons, 2008)1. A thir d is tha t the r esults o f 
visual inspection—an overall judgment of whether or not a tr eatment was effective—cannot be clearly and 
efficiently summarized or c ompared across studies (unlike the me asures of relationship strength typically 
used in group research). 
In g eneral, sing le-subject r esearchers shar e these c oncerns. H owever, the y also ar gue tha t their use o f 
the steady state strategy, combined with their f ocus on str ong and c onsistent effects, minimizes most o f 
them. If the ef fect of a tr eatment is dif ficult to de tect by visual inspe ction because the ef fect is w eak or 
the da ta ar e noisy, then sing le-subject r esearchers look f or w ays to incr ease the str ength o f the ef fect 
or reduce the noise in the da ta by controlling extraneous variables (e.g., by administering the tr eatment 
more consistently). If the ef fect is still dif ficult to detect, then they are likely to consider it neither strong 
enough nor consistent enough to be of further interest. Many single-subject researchers also point out that 
254  |  The Single-Subject Versus Group “Debate”statistical analysis is becoming increasingly common and that many of them are using this as a supplement 
to visual inspection—especially for the purpose of comparing results across studies (Scruggs & Mastropieri, 
2001)2. 
Turning the tables, some advocates of single-subject research worry about the way that group researchers 
analyze their data. Specifically, they point out that focusing on group means can be highly misleading. Again, 
imagine that a treatment has a strong positive effect on half the people exposed to it and an equally strong 
negative effect on the other half. I n a tr aditional between-subjects experiment, the posi tive effect on half 
the participants in the treatment condition would be statistically cancelled out by the negative effect on the 
other half. The me an for the tr eatment group would then be the same as the me an for the c ontrol group, 
making it seem as thoug h the tr eatment had no ef fect when in fac t it had a str ong effect on e very single 
participant! 
But again, gr oup r esearchers shar e this c oncern. Althoug h the y do f ocus on gr oup sta tistics, the y also 
emphasize the importance of examining distributions of individual scores. For example, if some participants 
were positively affected by a treatment and others nega tively affected by it, this would produce a bimodal 
distribution of scores and could be detected by looking at a histogram of the data. The use of within-subjects 
designs is another strategy that allows group researchers to observe effects at the individual level and even 
to specify what percentage of individuals exhibit strong, medium, weak, and even negative effects. Finally, 
factorial designs c an be use d to e xamine whether the ef fects of an independen t variable on a dependen t 
variable differ in different groups of participants (introverts vs. extraverts). 
External Validity 
The se cond issue about which sing le-subject and gr oup r esearchers some times disagr ee has to do wi th 
external validity—the ability to g eneralize the r esults of a stud y beyond the pe ople and spe cific situation 
actually studie d. I n par ticular, ad vocates o f gr oup r esearch poin t out the dif ficulty in kno wing whe ther 
results for just a few participants are likely to generalize to others in the popula tion. Imagine, for example, 
that in a sing le-subject study, a tr eatment has be en shown to r educe self-injury for each of two children 
with intellectual disabilities. Even if the effect is strong for these two children, how can one know whether 
this treatment is likely to work for other children with intellectual delays? 
Again, single-subject researchers share this concern. In response, they note that the strong and consistent 
effects the y ar e t ypically in terested in—e ven when obser ved in small samples—ar e lik ely to g eneralize 
to others in the popula tion. S ingle-subject r esearchers also note tha t the y plac e a str ong emphasis on 
replicating their r esearch results. W hen they observe an ef fect wi th a small sample o f participants, they 
typically try to replicate it with another small sample—per haps with a slightly different type of participant 
or under slightly different conditions. Each time the y observe similar results, they rightfully become more 
confident in the g enerality of those r esults. Single-subject researchers can also poin t to the fac t that the 
principles of classical and oper ant conditioning—most of which w ere discovered using the sing le-subject 
approach—have been successfully generalized across an incredibly wide range of species and situations. 
And, once again turning the tables, single-subject researchers have concerns of their own about the external 
The Single-Subject Versus Group “Debate”  |  255validity o f gr oup r esearch. One e xtremely impor tant poin t the y mak e is tha t stud ying lar ge gr oups o f 
participants does not entirely solve the problem of generalizing to other individuals. Imagine, for example, 
a tr eatment tha t has be en shown to ha ve a small posi tive ef fect on a verage in a lar ge gr oup stud y. It is 
likely that althoug h many par ticipants exhibited a small posi tive ef fect, others e xhibited a lar ge posi tive 
effect, and still others exhibited a small negative effect. When it comes to applying this treatment to another 
large group, we can be fairly sure that it will have a small ef fect on average. But when it comes to applying 
this tr eatment to another  individual, w e c annot be sur e whe ther i t will ha ve a small, a lar ge, or e ven a 
negative effect. Another poin t that sing le-subject researchers make is tha t group researchers also fac e a 
similar problem when they study a single situation and then generalize their results to other situations. For 
example, researchers who conduct a study on the effect of cell phone use on drivers on a closed oval track 
probably want to apply their results to drivers in many other real-world driving situations. But notice that 
this requires generalizing from a single situation to a population of situations. Thus the ability to generalize 
is based on much mor e than just the she er number o f participants one has studie d. It requires a c areful 
consideration of the similari ty of the par ticipants and situations studied to the popula tion of participants 
and situations to which one wants to generalize (Shadish, Cook, & Campbell, 2002)3. 
Single-Subject and Group Research as Complementary Methods 
As with quantitative and quali tative research, it is pr obably best to c onceptualize single-subject research 
and group research as complementary methods that have different strengths and weaknesses and that are 
appropriate for answering different kinds o f research questions (Kaz din, 1982)4. Single-subject research is 
particularly good for testing the ef fectiveness of treatments on individuals when the f ocus is on str ong, 
consistent, and biolog ically or sociall y important effects. It is also espe cially useful when the beha vior of 
particular individuals is of interest. Clinicians who work with only one individual at a time may find that it is 
their only option for doing systematic quantitative research. 
Group research, on the other hand, is ide al for testing the ef fectiveness of treatments at the gr oup level. 
Among the ad vantages of this appr oach is tha t it allows researchers to de tect weak effects, which c an be 
of interest for many reasons. For example, finding a w eak treatment ef fect mig ht lead to r efinements of 
the treatment that eventually produce a lar ger and mor e meaningful effect. Group research is also g ood 
for studying interactions between treatments and participant characteristics. For example, if a treatment is 
effective for those who are high in motivation to change and ineffective for those who are low in motivation 
to change, then a gr oup design c an detect this much mor e efficiently than a sing le-subject design. Gr oup 
research is also necessary to answer questions that cannot be addressed using the single-subject approach, 
including questions about independen t v ariables tha t c annot be manipula ted ( e.g., number o f si blings, 
extraversion, culture). 
Finally, i t is impor tant to understand tha t the sing le-subject and gr oup appr oaches r epresent dif ferent 
research traditions. This factor is probably the most impor tant one affecting which approach a researcher 
uses. R esearchers in the e xperimental anal ysis o f beha vior and applie d beha vior anal ysis le arn to 
conceptualize their r esearch questions in w ays tha t ar e amenable to the sing le-subject appr oach. 
Researchers in most other ar eas o f psy chology le arn to c onceptualize their r esearch questions in w ays 
256  |  The Single-Subject Versus Group “Debate”that are amenable to the gr oup approach. At the same time, ther e are many topics in psy chology in which 
research from the two traditions have informed each other and been successfully integrated. One example 
is research suggesting that both animals and humans have an innate “number sense”—an awareness of how 
many objects or e vents of a par ticular type have they have experienced without actually having to c ount 
them (Dehaene, 2011)5. Single-subject research with rats and birds and group research with human infants 
have shown striking ly similar abili ties in those popula tions to discrimina te small numbers o f objects and 
events. This number sense— which probably evolved long before humans did—may even be the f oundation 
of humans’ advanced mathematical abilities. 
The Principle of Converging Evidence 
Now that you have been introduced to many of the most c ommonly used research methods in psychology 
it should be r eadily apparent that no design is perf ect. Every research design has str engths and weakness. 
True experiments typically have high internal validity but ma y have problems with external validity, while 
non-experimental research (e.g., correlational research) often has g ood external validity but poor in ternal 
validity. Each study brings us closer to the truth but no single study can ever be considered definitive. This is 
one reason why, in science, we say there is no such thing as scientific proof, there is only scientific evidence. 
While the media will often try to reach strong conclusions on the basis of the findings of one study, scientists 
focus on evaluating a body of research. Scientists evaluate theories not by waiting for the perfect experiment 
but by looking at the overall trends in a number of partially flawed studies. The idea of converging evidence 
tells us to e xamine the pattern of flaws running through the research literature because the nature of this 
pattern can ei ther support or undermine the c onclusions we wish to dr aw. Suppose the findings fr om a 
number of different studies were largely consistent in supporting a particular conclusion. If all of the studies 
were flawed in a similar w ay, for example, if all o f the studies w ere correlational and c ontained the thir d 
variable problem and the directionality problem, this would undermine confidence in the conclusions drawn 
because the c onsistency o f the outc ome ma y simpl y ha ve r esulted fr om a par ticular fla w tha t all o f the 
studies shared. On the other hand, if all o f the studies w ere flawed in dif ferent ways and the w eakness of 
some of the studies were the strength of others (the low external validity of a true experiment was balanced 
by the high external validity of a correlational study), then we could be more confident in our conclusions. 
While there are fundamental tradeoffs in different research methods, the diverse set of approaches used by 
psychologists have complementary strengths that allow us to search for converging evidence. We can reach 
meaningful conclusions and come closer to understanding truth b y examining a large number of different 
studies each with different strengths and weakness. If the result of a large number of studies all conducted 
using dif ferent designs c onverge on the same c onclusion then our c onfidence in tha t conclusion can be 
increased dramatically. In science, we strive for progress, not perfection. 
The Single-Subject Versus Group “Debate”  |  257Notes 
1. Danov, S. E., & Symons, F. E. (2008). A survey evaluation of the reliability of visual inspection and functional analysis 
graphs. Behavior Modification, 32, 828–839. 
2. Scruggs, T. E., & Mastropieri, M. A. (2001). How to summarize single-participant research: Ideas and 
applications. Exceptionality, 9, 227–244. 
3. Shadish, W. R., Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (2002). Experimental and quasi-experimental designs for generalized 
causal inference. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin. 
4. Kazdin, A. E. (1982). Single-case research designs: Methods for clinical and applied settings. New York, NY: Oxford 
University Press. 
5. Dehaene, S. (2011). The number sense: How the mind creates mathematics (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Oxford. 
258  |  The Single-Subject Versus Group “Debate”47.  Key Takeaways and Exercises 
Key Takeaways 
• Single-subject research—which involves testing a small number of participants and focusing intensively 
on the behavior of each individual—is an important alternative to group research in psychology. 
• Single-subject studies must be distinguished from qualitative research on a single person or small 
number of individuals. Unlike more qualitative research, single-subject research focuses on 
understanding objective behavior through experimental manipulation and control, collecting highly 
structured data, and analyzing those data quantitatively. 
• Single-subject research has been around since the beginning of the field of psychology. Today it is most 
strongly associated with the behavioral theoretical perspective, but it can in principle be used to study 
behavior from any perspective. 
• Single-subject research designs typically involve measuring the dependent variable repeatedly over time 
and changing conditions (e.g., from baseline to treatment) when the dependent variable has reached a 
steady state. This approach allows the researcher to see whether changes in the independent variable are 
causing changes in the dependent variable. 
• In a reversal design, the participant is tested in a baseline condition, then tested in a treatment condition, 
and then returned to baseline. If the dependent variable changes with the introduction of the treatment 
and then changes back with the return to baseline, this provides strong evidence of a treatment effect. 
• In a multiple-baseline design, baselines are established for different participants, different dependent 
variables, or different settings—and the treatment is introduced at a different time on each baseline. If 
the introduction of the treatment is followed by a change in the dependent variable on each baseline, this 
provides strong evidence of a treatment effect. 
• Single-subject researchers typically analyze their data by graphing them and making judgments about 
whether the independent variable is affecting the dependent variable based on level, trend, and latency. 
• Differences between single-subject research and group research sometimes lead to disagreements 
between single-subject and group researchers. These disagreements center on the issues of data analysis 
and external validity (especially generalization to other people). 
• Single-subject research and group research are probably best seen as complementary methods, with 
different strengths and weaknesses, that are appropriate for answering different kinds of research 
questions. 
Exercises 
• Practice: Find and read a published article in psychology that reports new single-subject research. (An 
archive of articles published in the Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis can be found at 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/journals/309/) Write a short summary of the study. 
Key Takeaways and Exercises  |  259