CHAPTER  VII 
SURVEY RESEARCH 
Shortly after the terrorist attacks in New York City and Washington, DC, in September o f 2001, researcher 
Jennifer Lerner and her colleagues conducted an Internet-based survey of nearly 2,000 American teens and 
adults ranging in ag e from 13 to 88 (Lerner , Gonzalez, S mall, & F ischhoff, 2003)1. They asked participants 
about their r eactions to the a ttacks and f or their judgmen ts of various terrorism-related and other risks. 
Among the results were that the participants tended to overestimate most risks, tha t females did so mor e 
than males, and tha t ther e w ere no dif ferences be tween te ens and adults. The most in teresting r esult, 
however, had to do wi th the fac t that some par ticipants were “primed” to f eel anger by asking them wha t 
made them angry about the a ttacks and by presenting them with a photograph and audio clip intended to 
evoke anger. Others w ere primed to f eel fear by asking them wha t made them f earful about the a ttacks 
and b y pr esenting them wi th a photogr aph and a udio clip in tended to e voke f ear. As the r esearchers 
hypothesized, the participants who were primed to feel anger perceived less risk than the participants who 
had been primed to feel fear—showing how risk perceptions are strongly tied to specific emotions. 
The study by Lerner and her c olleagues is an e xample of survey research in psy chology—the topic o f this 
chapter. We begin with an overview of survey research, including its definition, some history, and a bit about 
who conducts it and why. We then look at survey responding as a psychological process and the implications 
of this f or c onstructing g ood sur vey questionnair es. F inally, we c onsider some issues r elated to ac tually 
conducting survey research, including sampling the participants and collecting the data. 
Notes 
1. Lerner, J. S., Gonzalez, R. M., Small, D. A., & Fischhoff, B. (2003). Effects of fear and anger on perceived risks of 
terrorism: A national field experiment. Psychological Science, 14, 144–150. 
Survey Research  |  18334.  Overview of Survey Research 
Learning Objectives 
1. Define what survey research is, including its two important characteristics. 
2. Describe several different ways that survey research can be used and give some examples. 
What Is Survey Research? 
Survey research is a quan titative and quali tative me thod wi th t wo impor tant char acteristics. F irst, the 
variables of interest are measured using self-reports (using questionnaires or interviews). In essence, survey 
researchers ask their par ticipants (who are often called respondents in survey research) to report directly 
on their o wn thoug hts, f eelings, and beha viors. Se cond, c onsiderable a ttention is paid to the issue o f 
sampling. In particular, survey researchers have a strong preference for large random samples because they 
provide the most ac curate estimates of what is true in the popula tion. In fact, survey research may be the 
only approach in psychology in which random sampling is routinely used. Beyond these two characteristics, 
almost anything goes in sur vey research. Surveys can be long or shor t. They can be c onducted in person, 
by telephone, thr ough the mail, or o ver the I nternet. The y c an be about v oting in tentions, c onsumer 
preferences, social a ttitudes, he alth, or an ything else tha t i t is possi ble to ask pe ople about and r eceive 
meaningful answers.  Although survey data are often analyzed using statistics, there are many questions that 
lend themselves to more qualitative analysis. 
Most survey research is non-e xperimental. It is use d to descri be sing le variables (e.g., the per centage of 
voters who pr efer one pr esidential candidate or another , the pr evalence of schizophrenia in the g eneral 
population, etc.) and also to assess statistical relationships between variables (e.g., the relationship between 
income and he alth). But surveys can also be use d within experimental research. The stud y by Lerner and 
her colleagues is a g ood example. Their use o f self-report measures and a lar ge national sample identifies 
their work as survey research. But their manipulation of an independent variable (anger vs. fear) to assess its 
effect on a dependent variable (risk judgments) also identifies their work as experimental. 
History and Uses of Survey Research 
Survey research may have i ts roots in Eng lish and Americ an “social surveys” conducted around the turn 
of the 20th c entury by researchers and reformers who wanted to document the extent of social problems 
such as po verty (Converse, 1987)1. By the 1930s, the US g overnment was conducting surveys to documen t 
Overview of Survey Research  |  185economic and social c onditions in the c ountry. The need to draw conclusions about the en tire population 
helped spur advances in sampling procedures. At about the same time, several researchers who had already 
made a name for themselves in market research, studying consumer preferences for American businesses, 
turned their attention to election polling. A watershed event was the presidential election of 1936 between 
Alf Landon and Franklin Roosevelt. A magazine called Literary Digest conducted a survey by sending ballots 
(which w ere also subscription r equests) to millions o f Americ ans. Base d on this “ straw poll,” the e ditors 
predicted that Landon would win in a landslide. A t the same time, the ne w pollsters w ere using scien tific 
methods with much smaller samples to pr edict just the opposi te—that Roosevelt would win in a landslide. 
In fact, one o f them, Ge orge Gallup, publicl y criticized the me thods of Literary Digest before the ele ction 
and all but guar anteed tha t his pr ediction w ould be c orrect. And o f c ourse, i t w as, demonstr ating the 
effectiveness of careful survey methodology (We will consider the reasons that Gallup was right later in this 
chapter). Gallup’s demonstration of the po wer of careful survey methods led later researchers to to loc al, 
and in 1948, the first na tional election survey by the Survey Research Center at the University of Michigan. 
This w ork e ventually be came the Americ an N ational Ele ction S tudies ( https://electionstudies.org/) as a 
collaboration of Stanford University and the University of Michigan, and these studies continue today. 
From mar ket r esearch and ele ction polling, sur vey r esearch made i ts w ay in to se veral ac ademic fields, 
including poli tical scienc e, sociolog y, and public he alth—where i t c ontinues to be one o f the primar y 
approaches to c ollecting ne w da ta. Beg inning in the 1930s, psy chologists made impor tant ad vances in 
questionnaire design, including techniques that are still used today, such as the Likert scale. (See “What Is a 
Likert Scale?” in Section 7.2 “Constructing Survey Questionnaires”.) Survey research has a strong historical 
association wi th the social psy chological stud y o f a ttitudes, ster eotypes, and pr ejudice. Ear ly a ttitude 
researchers w ere also among the first psy chologists to se ek lar ger and mor e div erse samples than the 
convenience samples of university students that were routinely used in psychology (and still are). 
Survey r esearch c ontinues to be impor tant in psy chology toda y. F or e xample, sur vey da ta ha ve be en 
instrumental in estima ting the pr evalence o f v arious men tal disor ders and iden tifying sta tistical 
relationships among those disor ders and wi th various other fac tors. The N ational Comorbidi ty Survey is 
a large-scale mental health survey conducted in the Uni ted States (see http://www.hcp.med.harvard.edu/
ncs). In just one part of this survey, nearly 10,000 adults were given a structured mental health interview in 
their homes in 2002 and 2003. Table 7.1 presents results on the lifetime prevalence of some anxiety, mood, 
and substance use disor ders. (Lifetime prevalence is the per centage of the popula tion that develops the 
problem sometime in their lif etime.) Obviously, this kind o f information can be o f great use both to basic 
researchers seeking to understand the causes and correlates of mental disorders as well as to clinicians and 
policymakers who need to understand exactly how common these disorders are. 
 
186  |  Overview of Survey ResearchTable 7.1 Some Lifetime Prevalence Results From the National Comorbidity Survey 
Lifetime prevalence* 
Disorder Total Female Male 
Generalized anxiety disorder 5.7 7.1 4.2 
Obsessive-compulsive disorder 2.3 3.1 1.6 
Major depressive disorder 16.9 20.2 13.2 
Bipolar disorder 4.4 4.5 4.3 
Alcohol abuse 13.2 7.5 19.6 
Drug abuse 8.0 4.8 11.6 
*The lifetime prevalence of a disorder is the percentage of people in the population that develop that disorder at 
any time in their lives. 
 
And as the opening e xample makes clear, survey research can even be use d as a da ta collection method 
within experimental research to test specific hypotheses about causal relationships between variables. Such 
studies, when c onducted on lar ge and div erse samples, c an be a useful supplemen t to labor atory studies 
conducted on university students. Survey research is thus a fle xible approach that can be used to study a 
variety of basic and applied research questions. 
Notes 
1. Converse, J. M. (1987). Survey research in the United States: Roots and emergence, 1890–1960. Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press. 
Overview of Survey Research  |  18735.  Constructing Surveys 
Learning Objectives 
1. Describe the cognitive processes involved in responding to a survey item. 
2. Explain what a context effect is and give some examples. 
3. Create a simple survey questionnaire based on principles of effective item writing and organization. 
 
The he art o f an y sur vey r esearch pr oject is the sur vey i tself. Althoug h i t is e asy to think o f in teresting 
questions to ask people, constructing a good survey is not easy at all. The problem is that the answers people 
give can be influenced in unintended ways by the wording of the items, the order of the items, the response 
options provided, and man y other fac tors. At best, these influenc es add noise to the da ta. At worst, they 
result in systematic biases and misleading results. In this section, therefore, we consider some principles for 
constructing surveys to minimize these unintended effects and thereby maximize the reliability and validity 
of respondents’ answers. 
Survey Responding as a Psychological Process 
Before looking at specific principles of survey construction, it will help to c onsider survey responding as a 
psychological process. 
A Cognitive Model 
Figure 7.1 presents a model o f the c ognitive processes that people engage in when r esponding to a sur vey 
item ( Sudman, B radburn, & Sch warz, 1996 )1. Respondents must in terpret the question, r etrieve r elevant 
information fr om memor y, f orm a ten tative judgmen t, c onvert the ten tative judgmen t in to one o f the 
response options provided (e.g., a rating on a 1-to-7 scale), and finally edit their response as necessary. 
 
188  |  Constructing SurveysFigure 7.1 Model of the Cognitive Processes Involved in Responding to a Survey Item. [Image description] 
Consider, for example, the following questionnaire item: 
 
How many alcoholic drinks do you consume in a typical day? 
• _____ a lot more than average 
• _____ somewhat more than average 
• _____ average 
• _____ somewhat fewer than average 
• _____ a lot fewer than average 
 
Although this i tem at first se ems straightforward, it poses se veral difficulties for respondents. First, they 
must interpret the question. F or example, they must de cide whether “alcoholic drinks” include be er and 
wine (as opposed to just hard liquor) and whether a “typical day” is a typical weekday, typical weekend day, 
or both. Even though Chang and Krosnick (2003)2 found that asking about “typical” behavior has been shown 
to be more valid than asking about “past” behavior, their study compared “typical week” to “past week” and 
may be different when considering typical weekdays or weekend days). Once respondents have interpreted 
the question, the y must r etrieve r elevant inf ormation fr om memor y to answ er i t. B ut wha t inf ormation 
should they retrieve, and ho w should the y go about r etrieving i t? They mig ht think v aguely about some 
recent oc casions on which the y dr ank alc ohol, the y mig ht c arefully tr y to r ecall and c ount the number 
of alcoholic drinks the y consumed last w eek, or the y mig ht retrieve some e xisting beliefs tha t they have 
about themselves (e.g., “I am not much o f a drink er”). Then the y must use this inf ormation to arriv e at a 
tentative judgment about how many alcoholic drinks they consume in a typical day. For example, this mental 
calculation might mean dividing the number of alcoholic drinks they consumed last week by seven to come 
up with an average number per day. Then they must format this tentative answer in terms of the response 
options actually provided. In this case, the options pose additional problems of interpretation. For example, 
what does “ average” me an, and wha t would c ount as “ somewhat mor e” than a verage? F inally, the y must 
decide whether they want to report the response they have come up with or whether they want to edit it in 
some way. For example, if they believe that they drink a lot more than average, they might not want to report 
that for fear of looking bad in the e yes of the researcher, so instead, they may opt to select the “somewhat 
more than average” response option. 
Constructing Surveys  |  189From this perspe ctive, what at first appe ars to be a simple ma tter of asking pe ople how much the y drink 
(and receiving a straightforward answer from them) turns out to be much more complex. 
Context Effects on Survey Responses 
Again, this complexity can lead to unintended influences on respondents’ answers. These are often referred 
to as context effects because they are not related to the content of the item but to the context in which the 
item appears (Schwarz & Strack, 1990)3. For example, there is an item-order effect when the order in which 
the items are presented affects people’s responses. One item can change how participants interpret a later 
item or change the information that they retrieve to respond to later items. For example, researcher Fritz 
Strack and his c olleagues asked college students about both their g eneral life satisfaction and their da ting 
frequency ( Strack, Mar tin, & Sch warz, 1988 )4. When the lif e sa tisfaction i tem c ame first, the c orrelation 
between the t wo was only −.12, sugg esting that the t wo variables are only weakly related. But when the 
dating frequency item came first, the correlation between the two was +.66, suggesting that those who date 
more have a strong tendency to be more satisfied with their lives. Reporting the dating frequency first made 
that information more accessible in memor y so tha t they were more likely to base their lif e satisfaction 
rating on it. 
The response options provided can also have unintended effects on people’s responses (Schwarz, 1999)5. For 
example, when pe ople are asked how often they are “really irritated” and g iven response options r anging 
from “less than once a year” to “more than once a month,” they tend to think of major irritations and report 
being irritated infrequently. But when they are given response options ranging from “less than once a day” to 
“several times a month,” they tend to think of minor irritations and report being irritated frequently. People 
also tend to assume tha t middle r esponse options r epresent what is normal or t ypical. So if the y think o f 
themselves as normal or typical, they tend to choose middle response options. For example, people are likely 
to report watching more television when the response options are centered on a middle option o f 4 hours 
than when centered on a middle option o f 2 hours. To mitigate against order effects, rotate questions and 
response items when there is no natural order. Counterbalancing or randomizing the order of presentation 
of the questions in online sur veys are good practices for survey questions and c an reduce response order 
effects that show that among undecided voters, the first c andidate listed in a ballot r eceives a 2.5% boost 
simply by virtue of being listed first6! 
Writing Survey Items 
Types of Items 
Questionnaire items can be ei ther open-ended or closed-ended. Open-ended items simply ask a question 
190  |  Constructing Surveysand allow participants to answer in whatever way they choose. The f ollowing are examples of open-ended 
questionnaire items. 
• “What is the most important thing to teach children to prepare them for life?” 
• “Please describe a time when you were discriminated against because of your age.” 
• “Is there anything else you would like to tell us about?” 
Open-ended items are useful when researchers do not know how participants might respond or when they 
want to avoid influencing their r esponses. Open-ended items are more qualitative in nature, so the y tend 
to be used when researchers have more vaguely defined research questions—often in the e arly stages of a 
research project. Open-ended items are relatively easy to wri te because there are no response options to 
worry about. However, they take more time and effort on the part of participants, and they are more difficult 
for the researcher to analyze because the answers must be transcribed, coded, and submitted to some form 
of qualitative analysis, such as content analysis. Another disadvantage is that respondents are more likely to 
skip open-ended items because they take longer to answer. It is best to use open-ended questions when the 
answer is unsure or for quantities which can easily be converted to categories later in the analysis. 
Closed-ended items ask a question and pr ovide a set of response options for participants to choose fr om. 
The alcohol item just mentioned is an example, as are the following: 
  
How old are you? 
• _____ Under 18 
• _____ 18 to 34 
• _____ 35 to 49 
• _____ 50 to 70 
• _____ Over 70 
 
On a scale of 0 (no pain at all) to 10 (worst pain ever experienced), how much pain are you in right now? 
Have you ever in your adult life been depressed for a period of 2 weeks or more? Yes    No 
Closed-ended items are used when researchers have a good idea of the different responses that participants 
might make. They are more quantitative in na ture, so the y are also use d when r esearchers are interested 
in a w ell-defined v ariable or c onstruct such as par ticipants’ le vel o f agr eement wi th some sta tement, 
perceptions of risk, or fr equency of a par ticular behavior. Closed-ended items are more difficult to wri te 
because the y must include an appr opriate se t o f r esponse options. H owever, the y ar e r elatively quick 
and easy for participants to c omplete. They are also much e asier for researchers to anal yze because the 
responses can be e asily converted to numbers and en tered into a spreadsheet. For these reasons, closed-
ended items are much more common. 
All close d-ended i tems include a se t o f r esponse options fr om which a par ticipant must choose. F or 
Constructing Surveys  |  191categorical v ariables lik e se x, r ace, or poli tical par ty pr eference, the c ategories ar e usuall y liste d and 
participants choose the one ( or ones ) to which the y belong. F or quan titative v ariables, a r ating sc ale is 
typically provided. A rating scale is an ordered set of responses that participants must choose from. Figure 
7.2 shows several examples. The number o f response options on a t ypical rating scale ranges from three 
to 11—although five and se ven are probably most c ommon. Five-point scales are best f or unipolar sc ales 
where only one c onstruct is teste d, such as fr equency (Never, Rarely, Sometimes, Often, Always). Seven-
point scales are best f or bipolar sc ales where there is a dichotomous spe ctrum, such as liking (Lik e very 
much, Like somewhat, Like slightly, Neither like nor dislike, Dislike slightly, Dislike somewhat, Dislike very 
much). For bipolar questions, i t is useful to o ffer an e arlier question tha t branches them in to an ar ea of 
the sc ale; if asking about liking ic e cr eam, first ask “Do y ou g enerally lik e or dislik e ic e cr eam?” Onc e 
the r espondent chooses lik e or dislik e, r efine i t b y o ffering them r elevant choic es fr om the se ven-point 
scale.  Branching improves both r eliability and validity (Krosnick & Ber ent, 1993)7.  Although you often see 
scales with numerical labels, i t is best to onl y present verbal labels to the r espondents but c onvert them 
to numerical values in the anal yses. Avoid partial labels or length or o verly specific labels. I n some c ases, 
the v erbal labels c an be supplemen ted wi th ( or e ven r eplaced b y) me aningful gr aphics. The last r ating 
scale shown in Figure 7.2 is a visual-analog scale, on which participants make a mark somewhere along the 
horizontal line to indicate the magnitude of their response. 
 
Figure 7.2 Example Rating Scales for Closed-Ended Questionnaire Items. [Image description] 
192  |  Constructing SurveysWhat Is a Likert Scale? 
In reading about psychological research, you are likely to encounter the term Likert scale. Although this term is 
sometimes used to refer to almost any rating scale (e.g., a 0-to-10 life satisfaction scale), it has a much more 
precise meaning. 
In the 1930s, researcher Rensis Likert (pronounced LICK-ert) created a new approach for measuring people’s 
attitudes (Likert, 1932)8. It involves presenting people with several statements—including both favorable and 
unfavorable statements—about some person, group, or idea. Respondents then express their agreement or 
disagreement with each statement on a 5-point scale: Strongly Agree, Agree, Neither Agree nor 
Disagree, Disagree, Strongly Disagree. Numbers are assigned to each response and then summed across all 
items to produce a score representing the attitude toward the person, group, or idea. For items that are 
phrased in an opposite direction (e.g., negatively worded statements instead of positively worded statements), 
reverse coding is used so that the numerical scoring of statements also runs in the opposite direction. The 
entire set of items came to be called a Likert scale. 
Thus unless you are measuring people’s attitude toward something by assessing their level of agreement with 
several statements about it, it is best to avoid calling it a Likert scale. You are probably just using a “rating 
scale.” 
Writing Effective Items 
We c an no w c onsider some principles o f wri ting questionnair e i tems tha t minimiz e unin tended c ontext 
effects and maximiz e the r eliability and v alidity of par ticipants’ responses. A r ough guideline f or wri ting 
questionnaire i tems is pr ovided b y the B RUSO model (P eterson, 2000 )9. An acr onym, BRUSO stands f or 
“brief,” “relevant,” “unambiguous,” “specific,” and “ objective.” Ef fective questionnair e i tems ar e brief and to 
the poin t. The y a void long, o verly te chnical, or unne cessary w ords. This br evity mak es them e asier f or 
respondents to understand and faster f or them to c omplete. Ef fective questionnair e i tems ar e 
also relevant to the research question. If a respondent’s sexual orientation, marital status, or income is not 
relevant, then i tems on them should pr obably not be include d. Again, this mak es the questionnair e faster 
to c omplete, but i t also a voids anno ying r espondents wi th wha t the y will rig htly per ceive as irr elevant 
or even “nosy” questions. Ef fective questionnaire items are also unambiguous; they can be in terpreted in 
only one w ay. Part of the pr oblem with the alc ohol item presented earlier in this se ction is tha t different 
respondents mig ht ha ve dif ferent ide as about wha t c onstitutes “ an alc oholic drink” or “ a t ypical da y.” 
Effective questionnair e i tems ar e also  specific so tha t i t is cle ar to r espondents wha t their 
response should be about and cle ar to r esearchers wha t i t is about. A c ommon pr oblem her e is close d-
ended items that are “double barrelled.” They ask about two conceptually separate issues but allow only one 
response. For example, “Please rate the extent to which you have been feeling anxious and depressed.” This 
item should probably be split into two separate items—one about anxiety and one about depression. Finally, 
effective questionnaire items are objective in the sense that they do not reveal the researcher’s own opinions 
Constructing Surveys  |  193or le ad par ticipants to answ er in a par ticular way. Table 7.2 shows some e xamples o f poor and ef fective 
questionnaire items based on the BRUSO criteria. The best way to know how people interpret the wording 
of the question is to conduct a pilot test and ask a few people to explain how they interpreted the question. 
 
Table 7.2 BRUSO Model of Writing Effective Questionnaire Items, Plus Examples 
Criterion Poor Effective 
B—Brief “Are you now or have you ever been the possessor 
of a firearm?” “Have you ever owned a gun?” 
R—Relevant “What is your sexual orientation?” Do not include this item unless it is clearly 
relevant to the research. 
U—Unambiguous “Are you a gun person?” “Do you currently own a gun?” 
S—Specific “How much have you read about the new gun 
control measure and sales tax?” 
“How much have you read about the new 
sales tax?” 
O—Objective “How much do you support the new gun control 
measure?” 
“What is your view of the new gun control 
measure?” 
 
For close d-ended i tems, i t is also impor tant to cr eate an appr opriate r esponse sc ale. F or c ategorical 
variables, the c ategories pr esented should g enerally be mutuall y e xclusive and e xhaustive. Mutuall y 
exclusive c ategories do not o verlap. F or a r eligion i tem, f or e xample, the c ategories o f Christian and
Catholic are not mutuall y e xclusive but  Protestant and Catholic are mutuall y e xclusive. Exha ustive 
categories cover all possi ble responses. Althoug h Protestant and Catholic are mutually exclusive, they are 
not e xhaustive be cause ther e ar e man y other r eligious c ategories tha t a r espondent mig ht 
select: Jewish, Hindu, Buddhist, and so on. In many cases, it is not feasible to include every possible category, 
in which case an Other category, with a space for the respondent to fill in a more specific response, is a good 
solution. If respondents could belong to mor e than one c ategory (e.g., race), they should be instruc ted to 
choose all categories that apply. 
For rating scales, five or se ven response options g enerally allow about as much pr ecision as r espondents 
are capable of. However, numerical scales with more options can sometimes be appropriate. For dimensions 
such as a ttractiveness, pain, and lik elihood, a 0-to-10 scale will be familiar to man y respondents and e asy 
for them to use. R egardless of the number o f response options, the most e xtreme ones should g enerally 
be “balanced” around a neutr al or modal midpoin t. An e xample of an unbalanc ed rating scale measuring 
perceived likelihood might look like this: 
Unlikely | Somewhat Likely | Likely | Very Likely | Extremely Likely 
A balanced version might look like this: 
Extremely Unlikely | Somewhat Unlikely | As Likely as Not | Somewhat Likely |Extremely Likely 
 Note, ho wever, tha t a middle or neutr al r esponse option does not ha ve to be include d. R esearchers 
sometimes choose to leave it out because they want to encourage respondents to think more deeply about 
194  |  Constructing Surveystheir response and not simply choose the middle option b y default. However, including middle alternatives 
on bipolar dimensions can be used to allow people to choose an option that is neither. 
 
Figure 7.3 “Question” retrieved from 
http://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/
question.png (CC-BY-NC 2.5). [Image 
description] 
Formatting the Survey 
Writing effective items is onl y one par t of constructing a sur vey. For one thing, e very survey should ha ve 
a written or spok en introduction that serves two basic func tions (Peterson, 2000)10. One is to enc ourage 
respondents to participate in the sur vey. In many types of research, such encouragement is not ne cessary 
either be cause par ticipants do not kno w the y ar e in a stud y ( as in na turalistic obser vation) or be cause 
they are part of a subje ct pool and ha ve already shown their willingness to par ticipate by signing up and 
showing up for the study. Survey research usually catches respondents by surprise when they answer their 
phone, go to their mailbox, or check their e-mail—and the researcher must make a good case for why they 
should agree to participate. Thus the in troduction should briefly explain the purpose o f the survey and its 
importance, provide information about the sponsor of the survey (university-based surveys tend to generate 
higher response rates), acknowledge the impor tance of the r espondent’s par ticipation, and descri be any 
incentives for participating. 
The se cond func tion o f the in troduction is to establish inf ormed c onsent. R emember tha t this in volves 
describing to respondents everything that might affect their decision to participate. This includes the topics 
covered by the sur vey, the amoun t of time i t is lik ely to tak e, the r espondent’s option to wi thdraw at any 
time, confidentiality issues, and so on. Written consent forms are not always used in survey research (when 
the research is o f minimal risk and c ompletion of the sur vey instrument is o ften accepted by the IRB as 
evidence of consent to participate), so it is important that this part of the introduction be well documented 
and presented clearly and in its entirety to every respondent. 
The introduction should be f ollowed by the substan tive questionnaire i tems. But first, i t is impor tant to 
Constructing Surveys  |  195present clear instructions for completing the questionnaire, including examples of how to use any unusual 
response sc ales. R emember tha t the in troduction is the poin t a t which r espondents ar e usuall y most 
interested and least fatigued, so it is good practice to start with the most impor tant items for purposes of 
the research and pr oceed to less impor tant items. Items should also be gr ouped by topic or b y type. For 
example, i tems using the same r ating scale (e.g., a 5-poin t agreement scale) should be gr ouped together 
if possi ble to mak e things faster and e asier f or r espondents. Demogr aphic i tems ar e o ften pr esented 
last be cause the y ar e le ast in teresting to par ticipants but also e asy to answ er in the e vent r espondents 
have become tired or bor ed. Of c ourse, any survey should end wi th an e xpression of appreciation to the 
respondent. 
Image Descriptions 
Figure 7 .1 imag e description:  Flowchart modelling the c ognitive pr ocesses in volved in r esponding to a 
survey item. In order, these processes are: 
• Question Interpretation 
• Information Retrieval 
• Judgment Formation 
• Response Formatting 
• Response Editing 
[Return to Figure 7.1] 
Figure 7.2 image description: Three different rating scales for survey questions. The first sc ale provides a 
choice between “strongly agree,” “agree,” “neither agree nor disagr ee,” “disagree,” and “ strongly disagree.” 
The second is a sc ale from 1 to 7, with 1 being “extremely unlikely” and 7 being “ extremely likely.” The third 
is a sliding scale, with one end marked “extremely unfriendly” and the other “extremely friendly.” [Return to 
Figure 7.2] 
Figure 7.3 image description: A note reads, “Dear Isaac. Do you like me?” with two check boxes reading “yes” 
or “no.” Someone has added a third check box, which they’ve checked, that reads, “There is as yet insufficient 
data for a meaningful answer.” [Return to Figure 7.3] 
Media Attributions 
• Question by XKCD license under CC BY-NC 2.5 
196  |  Constructing SurveysNotes 
1. Sudman, S., Bradburn, N. M., & Schwarz, N. (1996). Thinking about answers: The application of cognitive processes to 
survey methodology. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 
2. Chang, L., & Krosnick, J.A. (2003). Measuring the frequency of regular behaviors: Comparing the ‘typical week’ to the 
‘past week’. Sociological Methodology, 33, 55-80. 
3. Schwarz, N., & Strack, F. (1990). Context effects in attitude surveys: Applying cognitive theory to social research. In W. 
Stroebe & M. Hewstone (Eds.), European review of social psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 31–50). Chichester, UK: Wiley. 
4. Strack, F., Martin, L. L., & Schwarz, N. (1988). Priming and communication: The social determinants of information use 
in judgments of life satisfaction. European Journal of Social Psychology, 18, 429–442. 
5. Schwarz, N. (1999). Self-reports: How the questions shape the answers. American Psychologist, 54, 93–105. 
6. Miller, J.M. & Krosnick, J.A. (1998). The impact of candidate name order on election outcomes. Public Opinion 
Quarterly, 62(3), 291-330. 
7. Krosnick, J.A. & Berent, M.K. (1993). Comparisons of party identification and policy preferences: The impact of survey 
question format. American Journal of Political Science, 27(3), 941-964. 
8. Likert, R. (1932). A technique for the measurement of attitudes. Archives of Psychology,140, 1–55. 
9. Peterson, R. A. (2000). Constructing effective questionnaires. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
10. Peterson, R. A. (2000). Constructing effective questionnaires. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Constructing Surveys  |  19736.  Conducting Surveys 
Learning Objectives 
1. Explain the difference between probability and non-probability sampling, and describe the major types of 
probability sampling. 
2. Define sampling bias in general and non-response bias in particular. List some techniques that can be 
used to increase the response rate and reduce non-response bias. 
3. List the four major ways to conduct a survey along with some pros and cons of each. 
 
In this section, we consider how to go about conducting a survey. We first consider the issue o f sampling, 
followed by some different methods of actually collecting survey data. 
Sampling 
Essentially all psy chological research involves sampling—selecting a sample to stud y from the popula tion 
of interest. Sampling falls into two broad categories. The first category, Probability sampling, occurs when 
the r esearcher c an spe cify the pr obability tha t e ach member o f the popula tion will be sele cted f or the 
sample. The second is Non-probability sampling, which occurs when the r esearcher cannot specify these 
probabilities. Most psy chological r esearch in volves non-pr obability sampling. F or e xample, Convenience 
sampling—studying individuals who happen to be ne arby and willing to par ticipate—is a v ery c ommon 
form of non-probability sampling used in psychological research. Other forms of non-probability sampling 
include snowball sampling (in which existing research participants help recruit additional participants for 
the study), quota sampling (in which subgr oups in the sample are recruited to be pr oportional to those 
subgroups in the popula tion), and self-selection sampling (in which individuals choose to tak e part in the 
research on their own accord, without being approached by the researcher directly). 
Survey r esearchers, ho wever, ar e much mor e lik ely to use some f orm o f pr obability sampling. 
This tendency is because the goal of most survey research is to make accurate estimates about what is true 
in a particular population, and these estima tes are most accurate when based on a pr obability sample. For 
example, i t is impor tant for sur vey researchers to base their estima tes of election outcomes—which are 
often decided by only a few percentage points—on probability samples of likely registered voters. 
Compared wi th non-pr obability sampling, pr obability sampling r equires a v ery cle ar spe cification o f the 
population, which o f c ourse depends on the r esearch questions to be answ ered. The popula tion mig ht 
be all r egistered v oters in Washington S tate, all Americ an consumers who ha ve pur chased a c ar in the 
198  |  Conducting Surveyspast year, women in the Se attle over 40 y ears old who ha ve received a mammogr am in the past de cade, 
or all the alumni o f a par ticular university. Once the popula tion has be en specified, probability sampling 
requires a sampling frame. This sampling frame is essentially a list of all the members of the population from 
which to select the respondents. Sampling frames can come from a variety of sources, including telephone 
directories, lists of registered voters, and hospital or insurance records. In some cases, a map can serve as a 
sampling frame, allowing for the selection of cities, streets, or households. 
There ar e a v ariety o f dif ferent pr obability sampling me thods. Simple random sampling is done in such 
a w ay tha t e ach individual in the popula tion has an e qual pr obability o f being sele cted f or the sample. 
This type of sampling could involve putting the names o f all individuals in the sampling fr ame into a ha t, 
mixing them up, and then drawing out the number needed for the sample. Given that most sampling frames 
take the form of computer files, random sampling is more likely to involve computerized sorting or selection 
of respondents. A c ommon approach in telephone sur veys is r andom-digit dialing, in which a c omputer 
randomly generates phone numbers fr om among the possi ble phone numbers wi thin a g iven geographic 
area. 
A common alternative to simple r andom sampling is stratified random sampling, in which the popula tion 
is divided into dif ferent subgroups or “ strata” (usually based on demogr aphic characteristics) and then a 
random sample is tak en from each “stratum.” Proportionate stratified random sampling can be use d to 
select a sample in which the proportion of respondents in each of various subgroups matches the proportion 
in the popula tion. F or e xample, be cause about  12.6% o f the American population is African Americ an, 
stratified random sampling can be used to ensure that a survey of 1,000 American adults includes about 126 
African-American respondents. Disproportionate stratified random sampling can also be use d to sample 
extra respondents from particularly small subgr oups—allowing valid conclusions to be dr awn about those 
subgroups. For example, because Asian Americans make up a r elatively small per centage of the American
population (about 5.6%), a simple r andom sample o f 1,000 American adults mig ht include too f ew Asian 
Americans to dr aw an y c onclusions about them as distinc t fr om an y other subgr oup. I f r epresentation 
is impor tant to the r esearch question, ho wever, then dispr oportionate stratified random sampling c ould 
be use d to ensur e tha t enoug h Asian-American respondents ar e include d in the sample to dr aw v alid 
conclusions about Asian Americans a whole. 
Yet another t ype o f pr obability sampling is  cluster sampling, in which lar ger clusters o f individuals ar e 
randomly sample d and then individuals wi thin e ach cluster ar e r andomly sample d. This is the onl y 
probability sampling me thod that does not r equire a sampling fr ame. For example, to sele ct a sample o f 
small-town r esidents in Washington, a r esearcher mig ht r andomly sele ct se veral small to wns and then 
randomly select several individuals within each town. Cluster sampling is espe cially useful for surveys that 
involve face-to-face interviewing because it minimizes the amount of traveling that the interviewers must 
do. For example, instead of traveling to 200 small to wns to interview 200 residents, a research team could 
travel to 10 small towns and interview 20 residents of each. The National Comorbidity Survey was done using 
a form of cluster sampling. 
How large does a sur vey sample ne ed to be ? In general, this estimate depends on t wo factors. One is the 
level of confidence in the r esult that the r esearcher wants. The lar ger the sample, the closer an y statistic 
based on tha t sample will tend to be to the c orresponding value in the popula tion. The other fac tor is a 
practical c onstraint in the f orm o f the budg et o f the stud y. L arger samples pr ovide gr eater c onfidence, 
Conducting Surveys  |  199but they take more time, ef fort, and money to obtain. T aking these t wo factors into account, most sur vey 
research uses sample sizes that range from about 100 to about 1, 000. Conducting a power analysis prior to 
launching the survey helps to guide the researcher in making this trade-off. 
 
Sample Size and Population Size 
Why is a sample of about 1,000 considered to be adequate for most survey research—even when the population 
is much larger than that? Consider, for example, that a sample of only 1,000 American adults is generally 
considered a good sample of the roughly 252 million adults in the American population—even though it 
includes only about 0.000004% of the population! The answer is a bit surprising. 
One part of the answer is that a statistic based on a larger sample will tend to be closer to the population value 
and that this can be characterized mathematically. Imagine, for example, that in a sample of registered voters, 
exactly 50% say they intend to vote for the incumbent. If there are 100 voters in this sample, then there is a 
95% chance that the true percentage in the population is between 40 and 60. But if there are 1,000 voters in 
the sample, then there is a 95% chance that the true percentage in the population is between 47 and 53. 
Although this “95% confidence interval” continues to shrink as the sample size increases, it does so at a slower 
rate. For example, if there are 2,000 voters in the sample, then this reduction only reduces the 95% confidence 
interval to 48 to 52. In many situations, the small increase in confidence beyond a sample size of 1,000 is not 
considered to be worth the additional time, effort, and money. 
Another part of the answer—and perhaps the more surprising part—is that confidence intervals depend only on 
the size of the sample and not on the size of the population. So a sample of 1,000 would produce a 95% 
confidence interval of 47 to 53 regardless of whether the population size was a hundred thousand, a million, or 
a hundred million. 
Sampling Bias 
Probability sampling was developed in large part to address the issue of sampling bias. Sampling bias occurs 
when a sample is selected in such a way that it is not representative of the entire population and therefore 
produces inaccurate results. This bias was the reason that the Literary Digest straw poll was so far off in its 
prediction of the 1936 presidential election. The mailing lists use d came largely from telephone directories 
and lists of registered automobile owners, which over-represented wealthier people, who were more likely 
to vote for Landon. Gallup was successful because he knew about this bias and f ound ways to sample less 
wealthy people as well. 
There is one f orm o f sampling bias tha t e ven c areful r andom sampling is subje ct to. I t is almost ne ver 
the case that everyone selected for the sample ac tually responds to the sur vey. Some ma y have died or 
moved away, and others ma y decline to par ticipate because they are too busy , are not in terested in the 
200  |  Conducting Surveyssurvey topic, or do not participate in surveys on principle. If these survey non-responders differ from survey 
responders in systematic ways, then this difference can produce non-response bias. For example, in a mail 
survey on alcohol consumption, researcher Vivienne Lahaut and colleagues found that only about half the 
sample responded after the ini tial contact and t wo follow-up reminders (Lahaut, Jansen, van de Mheen, & 
Garretsen, 2002)1. The danger here is that the half who responded might have different patterns of alcohol 
consumption than the half who did not, which c ould le ad to inac curate c onclusions on the par t o f the 
researchers. So to test for non-response bias, the researchers later made unannounced visits to the homes 
of a subse t of the non-r esponders—coming back up to fiv e times if the y did not find them a t home. The y 
found that the original non-responders included an especially high proportion of abstainers (nondrinkers), 
which meant that their estima tes of alcohol consumption based only on the orig inal responders were too 
high. 
Although ther e ar e me thods f or sta tistically c orrecting f or non-r esponse bias, the y ar e base d on 
assumptions about the non-r esponders—for example, that they are more similar to la te responders than 
to e arly r esponders—which ma y not be c orrect. F or this r eason, the best appr oach to minimizing non-
response bias is to minimize the number of non-responders—that is, to maximize the response rate. There is 
a large research literature on the factors that affect survey response rates (Groves et al., 2004)2. In general, 
in-person interviews have the hig hest response rates, followed by telephone sur veys, and then mail and 
Internet surveys. Among the other fac tors that increase response rates are sending potential respondents 
a short pre-notification message informing them tha t they will be ask ed to par ticipate in a sur vey in the 
near future and sending simple f ollow-up reminders to non-r esponders after a f ew weeks. The per ceived 
length and complexity of the survey can also make a difference, which is why it is important to keep survey 
questionnaires as short, simple, and on topic as possible. Finally, offering an incentive—especially cash—is a 
reliable way to increase response rates. However, ethically, there are limits to offering incentives that may 
be so large as to be considered coercive. 
Conducting the Survey 
The four main ways to conduct surveys are through in-person interviews, by telephone, through the mail, 
and over the internet. As with other aspects of survey design, the choice depends on both the r esearcher’s 
goals and the budget. In-person interviews have the highest response rates and provide the closest personal 
contact wi th r espondents. P ersonal c ontact c an be impor tant, f or e xample, when the in terviewer must 
see and mak e judgmen ts about r espondents, as is the c ase wi th some men tal he alth in terviews. B ut in-
person interviewing is b y far the most c ostly approach. Telephone surveys have lower response rates and 
still pr ovide some personal c ontact wi th r espondents. The y c an also be c ostly but ar e g enerally less so 
than in-person interviews. Traditionally, telephone directories have provided fairly comprehensive sampling 
frames. However, this tr end is less true toda y as mor e pe ople choose to onl y ha ve c ell phones and do 
not install land lines tha t would be include d in telephone dir ectories. Mail surveys are less c ostly still but 
generally have even lower response rates—making them most susceptible to non-response bias. 
Not surprisingly, internet surveys are becoming more common. They are increasingly easy to construct and 
use (see “Online Survey Creation”). Although initial contact can be made by mail with a link provided to the 
Conducting Surveys  |  201survey, this appr oach does not ne cessarily produce higher response rates than an or dinary mail sur vey. A 
better approach is to make initial contact by email with a link directly to the survey. This approach can work 
well when the population consists of the members of an organization who have known email addresses and 
regularly use them ( e.g., a univ ersity community). For other popula tions, i t can be dif ficult or impossi ble 
to find a c omprehensive list o f email addr esses to ser ve as a sampling fr ame. Alternatively, a r equest to 
participate in the survey with a link to it can be posted on websites known to be visited by members of the 
population. But again it is very difficult to get anything approaching a random sample this way because the 
members of the population who visit the websites are likely to be different from the population as a whole. 
However, internet survey methods are in rapid development. Because of their low cost, and because more 
people are online than ever before, internet surveys are likely to become the dominant approach to survey 
data collection in the near future. 
Finally, it is important to note that some of the concerns that people have about collecting data online (e.g., 
that internet-based findings differ from those obtained with other methods) have been found to be myths.
Table 7.3 (adapted fr om Gosling, V azire, S rivastava, & J ohn, 2004)3 addresses thr ee such pr econceptions 
about data collected in web-based studies: 
 
Table 7.3 Some Preconceptions and Findings Pertaining to Web-based Studies 
Preconception Finding 
Internet samples are not 
demographically diverse 
Internet samples are more diverse than traditional samples in many domains, 
although they are not completely representative of the population 
Internet samples are 
maladjusted, socially isolated, or 
depressed 
Internet users do not differs from nonusers on markers of adjustment and 
depression 
Internet-based findings differ 
from those obtained with other 
methods 
Evidence so far suggests that internet-based findings are consistent with findings 
based on traditional methods (e.g., on self-esteem, personality), but more data are 
needed. 
Online Survey Creation 
There are now several online tools for creating online questionnaires. After a questionnaire is created, a link to 
it can then be emailed to potential respondents or embedded in a web page. The following websites are among 
those that offer free accounts. Although the free accounts limit the number of questionnaire items and the 
number of respondents, they can be useful for doing small-scale surveys and for practicing the principles of 
good questionnaire construction. Here are some commonly used online survey tools: 
• SurveyMonkey—https://surveymonkey.com 
• PsyToolkit—https://www.psytoolkit.org/ (free, noncommercial, and does many experimental paradigms) 
• Qualtrics—https://www.qualtrics.com/ 
202  |  Conducting Surveys• PsycData—https://www.psychdata.com/ 
A small note of caution: the data from US survey software are held on US servers, and are subject to be seized 
as granted through the Patriot Act. To avoid infringing on any rights, the following is a list of online survey sites 
that are hosted in Canada: 
• Fluid Surveys—http://fluidsurveys.com/ 
• Simple Survey—http://www.simplesurvey.com/ 
• Lime Survey—https://www.limesurvey.org 
There are also survey sites hosted in other countries outside of North America. 
Another new tool for survey researchers is Mechanical Turk (MTurk) created by Amazon.com 
https://www.mturk.com Originally created for simple usability testing, MTurk has a database of over 500,000 
workers from over 190 countries4. You can put simple tasks (for example, different question wording to test 
your survey items), set parameters as your sample frame dictates and deploy your experiment at a very low 
cost (for example, a few cents for less than 5 minutes). MTurk has been lauded as an inexpensive way to gather 
high-quality data (Buhrmester, Kwang, & Gosling, 2011)5. 
Notes 
1. Lahaut, V. M. H. C. J., Jansen, H. A. M., van de Mheen, D., & Garretsen, H. F. L. (2002). Non-response bias in a sample 
survey on alcohol consumption. Alcohol and Alcoholism, 37, 256–260. 
2. Groves, R. M., Fowler, F. J., Couper, M. P., Lepkowski, J. M., Singer, E., & Tourangeau, R. (2004). Survey methodology. 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
3. Gosling, S. D., Vazire, S., Srivastava, S., & John, O. P. (2004). Should we trust web-based studies? A comparative analysis 
of six preconceptions about internet questionnaires. American Psychologist, 59(2), 93-104. 
4. Natala@aws. (2011, January 26). Re: MTurk CENSUS: About how many workers were on Mechanical Turk in 2010? 
Message posted to Amazon Web Services Discussion Forums. Retrieved from https://forums.aws.amazon.com/
thread.jspa?threadID=58891 
5. Buhrmester, M., Kwang, T., & Gosling, S.D. (2011). Amazon’s Mechanical Turk: A new source of inexpensive, yet high 
quality, data? Perspectives on Psychological Science, 6(1), 3-5. 
Conducting Surveys  |  20337.  Key Takeaways and Exercises 
 
Key Takeaways 
• Survey research features the use of self-report measures on carefully selected samples. It is a flexible 
approach that can be used to study a wide variety of basic and applied research questions. 
• Survey research has its roots in applied social research, market research, and election polling. It has since 
become an important approach in many academic disciplines, including political science, sociology, 
public health, and, of course, psychology. 
• Survey research involves asking respondents to self-report on their own thoughts, feelings, and 
behaviors. 
• Most survey research is non-experimental in nature (it is used to describe variables or measure statistical 
relationships between variables) but surveys can also be used to measure dependent variables in true 
experiments. 
• Responding to a survey item is itself a complex cognitive process that involves interpreting the question, 
retrieving information, making a tentative judgment, putting that judgment into the required response 
format, and editing the response. 
• Survey responses are subject to numerous context effects due to question wording, item order, response 
options, and other factors. Researchers should be sensitive to such effects when constructing surveys 
and interpreting survey results. 
• Survey items are either open-ended or closed-ended. Open-ended items simply ask a question and allow 
respondents to answer in whatever way they want. Closed-ended items ask a question and provide 
several response options that respondents must choose from. 
• Use verbal labels instead of numerical labels although the responses can be converted to numerical data 
in the analyses. 
• According to the BRUSO model, questionnaire items should be brief, relevant, unambiguous, specific, and 
objective. 
• Survey research usually involves probability sampling, in which each member of the population has a 
known probability of being selected for the sample. Types of probability sampling include simple random 
sampling, stratified random sampling, and cluster sampling. 
• Sampling bias occurs when a sample is selected in such a way that it is not representative of the 
population and therefore produces inaccurate results. The most pervasive form of sampling bias is non-
response bias, which occurs when people who do not respond to the survey differ in important ways 
from people who do respond. The best way to minimize non-response bias is to maximize the response 
rate by prenotifying respondents, sending them reminders, constructing questionnaires that are short 
and easy to complete, and offering incentives. 
• Surveys can be conducted in person, by telephone, through the mail, and on the internet. In-person 
interviewing has the highest response rates but is the most expensive. Mail and internet surveys are less 
expensive but have much lower response rates. Internet surveys are likely to become the dominant 
approach because of their low cost. 
204  |  Key Takeaways and ExercisesExercises 
• Discussion: Think of a question that each of the following professionals might try to answer using survey 
research. 
◦ a social psychologist 
◦ an educational researcher 
◦ a market researcher who works for a supermarket chain 
◦ the mayor of a large city 
◦ the head of a university police force 
• Discussion: Write a survey item and then write a short description of how someone might respond to 
that item based on the cognitive model of survey responding (or choose any item on the Rosenberg Self-
Esteem Scale at http://www.bsos.umd.edu/socy/research/rosenberg.htm). 
• Practice: Write survey items for each of the following general questions. In some cases, a series of items, 
rather than a single item, might be necessary. 
◦ How much does the respondent use Facebook? 
◦ How much exercise does the respondent get? 
◦ How likely does the respondent think it is that the incumbent will be re-elected in the next 
presidential election? 
◦ To what extent does the respondent experience “road rage”? 
• Discussion: If possible, identify an appropriate sampling frame for each of the following populations. If 
there is no appropriate sampling frame, explain why. 
◦ students at a particular university 
◦ adults living in the state of Washington 
◦ households in Pullman, Washington 
◦ people with low self-esteem 
• Practice: Use one of the online survey creation tools to create a 10-item survey questionnaire on a topic 
of your choice. 
Key Takeaways and Exercises  |  205