CHAPTER  I 
THE SCIENCE OF PSYCHOLOGY 
Many pe ople belie ve tha t w omen tend to talk mor e than men— with some e ven sugg esting tha t this 
difference has a biolog ical basis. One widel y cited estimate is that women speak 20,000 words per day on 
average and men spe ak only 7,000. This claim se ems plausible, but is i t true? A gr oup of psychologists led 
by Matthias Mehl decided to find out. The y checked to se e if an yone had ac tually tried to c ount the dail y 
number of words spoken by women and men. No one had. So these researchers conducted a study in which 
female and male c ollege students (369 in all) w ore audio recorders while the y went about their liv es. The 
result? The women spoke an average of 16,215 words per day and the men spok e an average of 15,669—an 
extremely small difference that could easily be explained by chance. In an article in the journal Science, these 
researchers summed up their findings as follows: “We therefore conclude, on the basis of available empirical 
evidence, that the widespr ead and hig hly publicized stereotype about f emale talkativeness is unf ounded” 
(Mehl, Vazire, Ramirez-Esparza, Slatcher, & Pennebaker, 2007, p. 82)1. 
Psychology is usuall y define d as the scien tific stud y o f human beha vior and men tal pr ocesses, and this 
example illustrates the f eatures that make i t scientific. In this chapter , we look closel y at these f eatures, 
review the goals of psychology, and address several basic questions that students often have about it. Who 
conducts scientific research in psychology? Why? Does scientific psychology tell us anything that common 
sense does not? W hy should I bother to le arn the scien tific approach—especially if I w ant to be a clinic al 
psychologist and not a r esearcher? These ar e e xtremely g ood questions, and answ ering them no w will 
provide a solid foundation for learning the rest of the material in your course. 
Notes 
1. Mehl, M. R., Vazire, S., Ramirez-Esparza, N., Slatcher, R. B., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2007). Are women really more talkative 
than men? Science, 317, 82. 
The Science of Psychology  |  11.  Methods of Knowing 
Learning Objectives 
1. Describe the 5 methods of acquiring knowledge 
2. Understand the benefits and problems with each. 
 
Take a minute to ponder some of what you know and how you acquired that knowledge. Perhaps you know 
that you should mak e your bed in the morning be cause your mother or fa ther told y ou this is wha t you 
should do, per haps you know that swans are white because all o f the sw ans you have seen are white, or 
perhaps you know that your friend is l ying to you because she is ac ting strange and won’t look you in the 
eye. But should we trust knowledge from these sources? The methods of acquiring knowledge can be broken 
down into five categories each with its own strengths and weaknesses. 
Intuition 
The first me thod o f kno wing is in tuition. W hen w e use our in tuition, w e ar e r elying on our guts, our 
emotions, and/or our instincts to guide us. Rather than examining facts or using rational thought, intuition 
involves believing what feels true. The problem with relying on intuition is that our intuitions can be wrong 
because the y ar e driv en b y c ognitive and motiv ational biases r ather than log ical r easoning or scien tific 
evidence. While the strange behavior of your friend may lead you to think s/he is lying to you it may just be 
that s/he is holding in a bit of gas or is preoccupied with some other issue that is irrelevant to you. However, 
weighing alternatives and thinking o f all the dif ferent possibilities can be par alyzing for some pe ople and 
sometimes decisions based on intuition are actually superior to those base d on analysis (people interested 
in this idea should read Malcolm Gladwell’s book Blink)1. 
Authority 
Perhaps one o f the most c ommon me thods o f ac quiring kno wledge is thr ough a uthority. This me thod 
involves ac cepting ne w ide as be cause some a uthority figur e sta tes tha t the y ar e true. These a uthorities 
include parents, the media, doctors, Priests and other religious authorities, the government, and professors. 
While in an ide al w orld w e should be able to trust a uthority figur es, histor y has ta ught us other wise 
and many instances of atrocities against humani ty are a consequence of people unquestioningly following 
Methods of Knowing  |  3authority ( e.g., Salem W itch T rials, N azi W ar Crimes ). On a mor e benign le vel, while y our par ents ma y 
have told y ou that you should mak e your bed in the morning, making y our bed provides the w arm damp 
environment in which mi tes thriv e. Keeping the she ets open pr ovides a less hospi table environment f or 
mites. These examples illustrate that the problem with using authority to obtain knowledge is that they may 
be wrong, they may just be using their intuition to arrive at their conclusions, and they may have their own 
reasons to misle ad you. Nevertheless, much o f the inf ormation we acquire is thr ough authority because 
we don’t have time to question and independen tly r esearch e very pie ce o f knowledge we le arn thr ough 
authority. But we can learn to e valuate the cr edentials of authority figures, to e valuate the me thods they 
used to arrive at their conclusions, and evaluate whether they have any reasons to mislead us. 
Rationalism 
Rationalism involves using logic and reasoning to acquire new knowledge. Using this method premises are 
stated and logical rules are followed to arrive at sound conclusions. For instance, if I am g iven the premise 
that all swans are white and the premise that this is a swan then I can come to the rational conclusion that 
this swan is whi te without actually seeing the swan. The problem with this method is that if the pr emises 
are wrong or there is an error in logic then the conclusion will not be v alid. For instance, the premise that 
all swans are white is incorrect; there are black swans in Australia. Also, unless formally trained in the rules 
of logic it is easy to make an error. Nevertheless, if the pr emises are correct and logical rules are followed 
appropriately then this is sound means of acquiring knowledge. 
Empiricism 
Empiricism in volves ac quiring kno wledge thr ough obser vation and e xperience. Onc e again man y o f y ou 
may have belie ved that all sw ans are whi te be cause you have onl y e ver se en white swans. For c enturies 
people belie ved the w orld is fla t be cause i t appe ars to be fla t. These e xamples and the man y visual 
illusions that trick our senses illustrate the problems with relying on empiricism alone to derive knowledge. 
We ar e limi ted in wha t w e c an e xperience and obser ve and our senses c an de ceive us. M oreover, our 
prior e xperiences c an alter the w ay w e per ceive e vents. N evertheless, empiricism is a t the he art o f the 
scientific method. Science relies on observations. But not just any observations, science relies on structured 
observations which is known as systematic empiricism. 
The Scientific Method 
The scientific method is a pr ocess of systematically collecting and e valuating evidence to test ide as and 
answer questions. W hile scien tists ma y use in tuition, a uthority, r ationalism, and empiricism to g enerate 
new ideas they don’t stop there. Scientists go a step further by using systematic empiricism to make careful 
4  |  Methods of Knowingobservations under v arious controlled conditions in or der to test their ide as and the y use r ationalism to 
arrive at valid conclusions. While the scientific method is the most lik ely of all of the methods to produce 
valid knowledge, like all me thods of acquiring knowledge it also has i ts drawbacks. One major pr oblem is 
that it is not al ways feasible to use the scien tific method; this me thod can require considerable time and 
resources. Another problem with the scientific method is that it cannot be used to answer all questions. As 
described in the f ollowing section, the scientific method can only be used to address empirical questions. 
This book and your research methods course are designed to provide you with an in-depth examination of 
how psychologists use the scientific method to advance our understanding of human behavior and the mind. 
 
Notes 
1. Gladwell, M. E. (2005). Blink: The power of thinking without thinking. (9th ed.). New York: Little, Brown & Co. 
Methods of Knowing  |  52.  Understanding Science 
Learning Objectives 
1. Define science. 
2. Describe the three fundamental features of science. 
3. Explain why psychology is a science. 
4. Define pseudoscience and give some examples. 
What Is Science? 
Some pe ople ar e surprise d to le arn tha t psy chology is a  science. The y g enerally agr ee tha t astr onomy, 
biology, and chemistr y are sciences but w onder what psychology has in c ommon with these other fields. 
Before answering this question, ho wever, it is worth reflecting on what astronomy, biology, and chemistry 
have in c ommon with each other. It is cle arly not their subje ct matter. Astronomers study celestial bodies, 
biologists study living organisms, and chemists study matter and its properties. It is also not the equipment 
and techniques that they use. F ew biologists would know what to do wi th a r adio telescope, for example, 
and few chemists w ould know how to tr ack a moose popula tion in the wild. F or these and other r easons, 
philosophers and scien tists who ha ve thoug ht de eply about this question ha ve c oncluded tha t wha t the 
sciences have in common is a general approach to understanding the natural world. Psychology is a science 
because i t tak es this same g eneral appr oach to understanding one aspe ct o f the na tural w orld: human 
behavior. 
Features of Science 
The g eneral scien tific appr oach has thr ee fundamen tal f eatures ( Stanovich, 2010 )1. The first 
is systematic empiricism. Empiricism r efers to le arning based on obser vation, and scien tists learn about 
the natural world systematically, by c arefully planning, making, r ecording, and anal yzing obser vations of 
it. As w e will se e, logical reasoning and e ven creativity play important roles in scienc e too, but scien tists 
are unique in their insistenc e on che cking their ide as about the w ay the w orld is against their systema tic 
observations. N otice, f or e xample, tha t M ehl and his c olleagues did not trust other pe ople’s ster eotypes 
or e ven their o wn inf ormal obser vations. I nstead, the y systema tically r ecorded, c ounted, and c ompared 
the number o f words spoken by a lar ge sample o f women and men. F urthermore, when their systema tic 
observations turned out to conflict with people’s stereotypes, they trusted their systematic observations. 
6  |  Understanding ScienceThe se cond f eature o f the scien tific appr oach—which f ollows in a str aightforward way fr om the first—is 
that it is concerned with empirical questions. These are questions about the way the world actually is and, 
therefore, can be answered by systematically observing it. The question of whether women talk more than 
men is empiric al in this w ay. Either women really do talk mor e than men or the y do not, and this c an be 
determined by systematically observing how much w omen and men ac tually talk. H aving said this, ther e 
are many interesting and impor tant questions tha t are not empiric ally testable and tha t science is not in 
a posi tion to answ er. Among these ar e questions about v alues—whether things ar e g ood or bad, just or 
unjust, or beautiful or ugly, and how the world ought to be. So although the question of whether a stereotype 
is accurate or inac curate is an empiric ally testable one tha t science can answer, the question—or , rather, 
the value judgment—of whether it is wrong for people to hold inac curate stereotypes is not. S imilarly, the 
question of whether criminal behavior has a genetic basis is an empirical question, but the question of what 
actions ought to be c onsidered illegal is not. I t is especially important for researchers in psychology to be 
mindful of this distinction. 
The thir d f eature o f scienc e is tha t i t cr eates public kno wledge. Af ter asking their empiric al questions, 
making their systema tic obser vations, and dr awing their c onclusions, scien tists publish their w ork. This 
usually means writing an ar ticle for publication in a pr ofessional journal, in which the y put their r esearch 
question in the c ontext o f pr evious r esearch, descri be in de tail the me thods the y use d to answ er their 
question, and cle arly present their r esults and c onclusions. Increasingly, scientists are opting to publish 
their w ork in open ac cess journals, in which the ar ticles ar e fr eely a vailable to all – scien tists and 
nonscientists alike. This important choice allows publicly-funded research to create knowledge that is truly 
public. 
Publication is an essential feature of science for two reasons. One is that science is a social process—a large-
scale collaboration among many researchers distributed across both time and space. Our current scientific 
knowledge of most topics is based on many different studies conducted by many different researchers who 
have shared their work publicly over many years. The second is that publication allows science to be self -
correcting. Individual scientists understand tha t, despi te their best ef forts, their me thods c an be fla wed 
and their conclusions incorrect. Publication allows others in the scientific community to detect and correct 
these errors so that, over time, scientific knowledge increasingly reflects the way the world actually is. 
A good example of the self -correcting nature of science is the “ Many L abs Replication Project” – a lar ge 
and c oordinated ef fort b y pr ominent psy chological scien tists ar ound the w orld to a ttempt to r eplicate 
findings from 13 classic and contemporary studies (Klein et al., 2013)2. One of the findings selected by these 
researchers for replication was the fascinating effect, first reported by Simone Schnall and her c olleagues 
at the University of Plymouth, that washing one’s hands leads people to view moral transgressions—ranging 
from k eeping mone y inside a f ound w allet to using a ki tten f or se xual ar ousal—as less wr ong ( Schnall, 
Benton, & Harvey, 2008)3. If reliable, this effect might help explain why so many religious traditions associate 
physical cle anliness wi th mor al puri ty. H owever, despi te using the same ma terials and ne arly iden tical 
procedures with a much lar ger sample, the “Man y Labs” researchers were unable to r eplicate the orig inal 
finding (Johnson, Cheung, & Donnellan, 2013)4, suggesting that the original finding may have stemmed from 
the relatively small sample size (which can lead to unreliable results) used in the original study. To be clear, 
at this stage we are still unable to definitively conclude that the handwashing effect does not exist; however, 
Understanding Science  |  7the ef fort tha t has g one in to testing i ts r eliability c ertainly demonstr ates the c ollaborative and c autious 
nature of scientific progress. 
For mor e on the r eplication crisis in psy chology se e: http://nobaproject.com/modules/the-replication-
crisis-in-psychology 
Science Versus Pseudoscience 
Pseudoscience refers to ac tivities and beliefs tha t ar e claime d to be scien tific b y their pr oponents—and 
may appear to be scien tific a t first g lance—but ar e not. Consider the the ory o f bior hythms ( not to be 
confused with sleep cycles or cir cadian rhythms that do ha ve a scien tific basis). The ide a is tha t people’s 
physical, intellectual, and emotional abilities run in cycles that begin when they are born and continue until 
they die. Alleg edly, the ph ysical cycle has a period o f 23 days, the in tellectual cycle a period o f 33 da ys, 
and the emotional c ycle a period o f 28 da ys. So, f or example, if y ou had the option o f when to sche dule 
an exam, you would want to schedule it for a time when y our intellectual cycle will be at a high point. The 
theory of biorhythms has been around for more than 100 years, and you can find numerous popular books 
and websites about bior hythms, often containing impressive and scien tific-sounding terms lik e sinusoidal 
wave and bioelectricity. The problem with biorhythms, however, is that scientific evidence indicates they do 
not exist (Hines, 1998)5. 
A set of beliefs or ac tivities can be said to be pseudoscien tific if ( a) its adherents claim or impl y that it is 
scientific but (b) it lacks one or more of the three features of science. For instance, it might lack systematic 
empiricism. Either there is no relevant scientific research or, as in the case of biorhythms, there is relevant 
scientific research but it is ignored. It might also lack public knowledge. People who promote the beliefs or 
activities might claim to ha ve conducted scientific research but ne ver publish tha t research in a w ay that 
allows others to evaluate it. 
A set of beliefs and activities might also be pseudoscientific because it does not address empirical questions. 
The philosopher Kar l P opper w as espe cially c oncerned wi th this ide a (P opper, 200 2)6. H e ar gued mor e 
specifically tha t an y scien tific claim must be e xpressed in such a w ay tha t ther e ar e obser vations tha t 
would—if the y w ere made—c ount as e vidence against the claim. I n other w ords, scien tific claims must 
be falsifiable. The claim that women talk more than men is falsifiable because systematic observations could 
reveal either that they do talk mor e than men or tha t they do not. As an e xample of an unfalsifiable claim, 
consider that many people who belie ve in e xtrasensory perception (ESP) and other psy chic powers claim 
that such po wers c an disappe ar when the y ar e obser ved too closel y. This mak es i t so tha t no possi ble 
observation would count as evidence against ESP. If a careful test of a self-proclaimed psychic showed that 
she pr edicted the futur e a t be tter-than-chance le vels, this w ould be c onsistent wi th the claim tha t she 
had psychic powers. But if she faile d to predict the future at better-than-chance levels, this would also be 
consistent with the claim because her powers can supposedly disappear when they are observed too closely. 
Why should we concern ourselves with pseudoscience? There are at least three reasons. One is that learning 
about pseudoscience helps bring the fundamen tal features of science—and their importance—into sharper 
focus. A se cond is tha t bior hythms, psy chic po wers, astr ology, and man y other pseudoscien tific beliefs 
8  |  Understanding Scienceare widel y held and ar e pr omoted on the I nternet, on tele vision, and in books and magazines. F ar fr om 
being harmless, the promotion of these beliefs often results in great personal toll as, for example, believers 
in pseudoscienc e opt f or “tr eatments” such as home opathy f or serious me dical c onditions inste ad o f 
empirically-supported treatments. Learning what makes them pseudoscientific can help us to iden tify and 
evaluate such beliefs and pr actices when we encounter them. A thir d reason is that many pseudosciences 
purport to explain some aspect of human behavior and mental processes, including biorhythms, astrology, 
graphology (hand writing anal ysis), and magne t ther apy f or pain c ontrol. I t is impor tant f or studen ts o f 
psychology to distinguish their own field clearly from this “pseudo psychology.” 
 
The Skeptic’s Dictionary 
An excellent source for information on pseudoscience is The Skeptic’s Dictionary (http://www.skepdic.com). 
Among the pseudoscientific beliefs and practices you can learn about are the following: 
• Cryptozoology. The study of “hidden” creatures like Bigfoot, the Loch Ness monster, and the chupacabra. 
• Pseudoscientific psychotherapies. Past-life regression, rebirthing therapy, and bioscream therapy, 
among others. 
• Homeopathy. The treatment of medical conditions using natural substances that have been diluted 
sometimes to the point of no longer being present. 
• Pyramidology. Odd theories about the origin and function of the Egyptian pyramids (e.g., that they were 
built by extraterrestrials) and the idea that pyramids, in general, have healing and other special powers. 
Another excellent online resource is Neurobonkers (http://neurobonkers.com), which regularly posts articles 
that investigate claims that pertain specifically to psychological science. 
Notes 
1. Stanovich, K. E. (2010). How to think straight about psychology (9th ed.). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon. 
2. Klein, R. A., Ratliff, K. A., Vianello, M., Adams, R. B., Bahník, S., Bernstein, M. J., . . . Nosek, B. A. (2013). Investigating 
variation in replicability: A “many labs” replication project. Social Psychology, 45(3), 142-152. doi: 10.1027/1864-9335/
a000178 
3. Schnall, S., Benton, J., & Harvey, S. (2008). With a clean conscience: Cleanliness reduces the severity of moral 
judgments. Psychological Science, 19(12), 1219-1222. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02227.x 
4. Johnson, D. J., Cheung, F., & Donnellan, M. B. (2013). Does cleanliness influence moral judgments? A direct replication 
of Schnall, Benton, and Harvey (2008). Social Psychology, 45(3), 209-215. doi: 10.1027/1864-9335/a000186 
5. Hines, T. M. (1998). Comprehensive review of biorhythm theory. Psychological Reports, 83, 19–64. 
6. Popper, K. R. (2002). Conjectures and refutations: The growth of scientific knowledge. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Understanding Science  |  93.  Goals of Science 
Learning Objectives 
1. Describe the three goals of science and give an example for each. 
2. Distinguish between basic research and applied research. 
The Broader Purposes of Scientific Research in Psychology 
People have always been curious about the na tural world, including themselves and their behavior (in fact, 
this is probably why you are studying psychology in the first place). Science grew out of this natural curiosity 
and has be come the best w ay to achie ve detailed and ac curate knowledge. Keep in mind tha t most o f the 
phenomena and theories that fill psychology textbooks are the products of scientific research. In a typical 
introductory psychology textbook, for example, one can learn about specific cortical areas for language and 
perception, principles of classical and operant conditioning, biases in reasoning and judgment, and people’s 
surprising tendency to obey those in positions of authority. And scientific research continues because what 
we know right now only scratches the surface of what we can know. 
The Three Goals of Science 
The first and most basic goal of science is to describe. This goal is achieved by making careful observations. 
As an e xample, per haps I am in terested in be tter understanding the me dical c onditions tha t me dical 
marijuana patients use marijuana to treat. In this case, I could try to access records at several large medical 
marijuana licensing centers to see which conditions people are getting licensed to use medical marijuana. Or 
I could survey a large sample of medical marijuana patients and ask them to report which medical conditions 
they use marijuana to treat or manage. Indeed, research involving surveys of medical marijuana patients has 
been conducted and has found that the primary symptom medical marijuana patients use marijuana to treat 
is pain, followed by anxiety and depression (Sexton, Cuttler, Finnell, & Mischley, 2016).1. 
The second goal of science is to predict. Once we have observed with some regularity that two behaviors 
or e vents ar e systema tically r elated to one another w e c an use tha t inf ormation to pr edict whe ther an 
event or beha vior will oc cur in a c ertain situation. Once I kno w that most me dical marijuana pa tients use 
marijuana to treat pain I can use that information to predict that an individual who uses me dical marijuana 
likely experiences pain. Of course, my predictions will not be 100% accurate but if the relationship between 
medical marijuana use and pain is strong then my predictions will have greater than chance accuracy. 
10  |  Goals of ScienceThe third and ultimate goal of science is to explain. This goal involves determining the causes of behavior. 
For example, researchers might try to understand the me chanisms through which marijuana reduces pain. 
Does marijuana r educe inflamma tion which in turn r educes pain ? Or does marijuana simpl y r educe the 
distress associated with pain r ather than r educing pain i tself? As y ou can see these questions tap a t the 
underlying mechanisms and causal relationships. 
Basic versus Applied Research 
Scientific r esearch is o ften classifie d as being ei ther basic or applie d. Basic research in psy chology is 
conducted primaril y f or the sak e o f achie ving a mor e de tailed and ac curate understanding o f human 
behavior, without necessarily trying to address any particular practical problem. The research of Mehl and 
his colleagues falls in to this c ategory. Applied research is conducted primarily to addr ess some pr actical 
problem. Research on the effects of cell phone use on driving, for example, was prompted by safety concerns 
and has le d to the enac tment o f laws to limi t this pr actice. Althoug h the distinc tion be tween basic and 
applied research is convenient, it is not always clear-cut. For example, basic research on sex differences in 
talkativeness could eventually have an ef fect on ho w marriage therapy is pr acticed, and applie d research 
on the ef fect of cell phone use on driving c ould produce new insights into basic pr ocesses of perception, 
attention, and action. 
Notes 
1. Sexton, M., Cuttler, C., Finnell, J., & Mischley, L (2016). A cross-sectional survey of medical cannabis users: Patterns of 
use and perceived efficacy. Cannabis and Cannabinoid Research, 1, 131-138. doi: 10.1089/can.2016.0007. 
Goals of Science  |  114.  Science and Common Sense 
Learning Objectives 
1. Explain the limitations of common sense when it comes to achieving a detailed and accurate 
understanding of human behavior. 
2. Give several examples of common sense or folk psychology that are incorrect. 
3. Define skepticism and its role in scientific psychology. 
Can We Rely on Common Sense? 
Some people wonder whether the scien tific approach to psy chology is ne cessary. Can w e not r each the 
same conclusions based on common sense or intuition? Certainly we all have intuitive beliefs about people’s 
behavior, thoughts, and feelings—and these beliefs are collectively referred to as folk psychology. Although 
much of our folk psychology is probably reasonably accurate, it is clear that much of it is not. For example, 
most pe ople belie ve tha t ang er c an be r elieved b y “le tting i t out”—per haps b y punching some thing or 
screaming loudly. Scientific research, however, has shown that this approach tends to le ave people feeling 
more angry, not less (Bushman, 2002)1. Likewise, most people believe that no one would confess to a crime 
that they  had not committed unless perhaps that person was being physically tortured. But again, extensive 
empirical research has sho wn that false c onfessions are surprising ly common and oc cur for a v ariety of 
reasons (Kassin & Gudjonsson, 2004)2. 
 
Some Great Myths 
In 50 Great Myths of Popular Psychology, psychologist Scott Lilienfeld and colleagues discuss several widely 
held commonsense beliefs about human behavior that scientific research has shown to be incorrect (Lilienfeld, 
Lynn, Ruscio, & Beyerstein, 2010)3. Here is a short list: 
• “People use only 10% of their brain power.” 
• “Most people experience a midlife crisis in their 40’s or 50’s.” 
• “Students learn best when teaching styles are matched to their learning styles.” 
• “Low self-esteem is a major cause of psychological problems.” 
12  |  Science and Common Sense• “Psychiatric admissions and crimes increase during full moons.” 
How Could We Be So Wrong? 
How can so many of our intuitive beliefs about human behavior be so wrong? Notice that this is an empirical 
question, and i t just so happens tha t psychologists have conducted scientific research on i t and identified 
many c ontributing fac tors ( Gilovich, 1991) 4. One is tha t f orming de tailed and ac curate beliefs r equires 
powers of obser vation, memor y, and anal ysis to an e xtent that we do not na turally possess. I t would be 
nearly impossible to count the number o f words spoken by the women and men w e happen to enc ounter, 
estimate the number o f words they spoke per da y, average these numbers f or both gr oups, and c ompare 
them—all in our he ads. This is wh y we tend to r ely on men tal shor tcuts (what psychologists r efer to as 
heuristics) in forming and maintaining our beliefs. F or example, if a belief is widel y shared—especially if it 
is endorsed by “experts”—and it makes intuitive sense, w e tend to assume i t is true. This is c ompounded 
by the fac t that we then tend to f ocus on c ases that confirm our in tuitive beliefs and not on c ases that 
dis-confirm them. This is c alled confirmation bias. For example, once we begin to believe that women are 
more talkative than men, w e tend to notic e and r emember talkative women and silen t men but ignor e or 
forget silent women and talka tive men. W e also hold inc orrect beliefs in par t because it would be nic e if 
they were true. F or e xample, man y pe ople belie ve tha t c alorie-reducing die ts ar e an ef fective long-term 
treatment for obesity, yet a thorough review of the scientific evidence has shown that they are not (Mann et 
al., 2007)5. People may continue to believe in the effectiveness of dieting in part because it gives them hope 
for losing weight if they are obese or makes them feel good about their own “self-control” if they are not. 
Scientists—especially psychologists—understand that they are just as susceptible as anyone else to intuitive 
but incorrect beliefs. This is wh y they cultivate an a ttitude of skepticism. Being sk eptical does not me an 
being cynical or distrustful, nor does i t mean questioning e very belief or claim one c omes across (which 
would be impossi ble an yway). I nstead, i t me ans pa using to c onsider alterna tives and to se arch f or 
evidence—especially systematically collected empirical evidence—when there is enoug h at stake to justif y 
doing so. F or example, imagine that you read a magazine ar ticle that claims tha t giving children a w eekly 
allowance is a good way to help them develop financial responsibility. This is an interesting and potentially 
important claim ( especially if y ou have children of your own). Taking an a ttitude of skepticism, however, 
would mean pausing to ask whether it might be instead that receiving an allowance merely teaches children 
to spend money—perhaps even to be more materialistic. Taking an attitude of skepticism would also mean 
asking wha t e vidence suppor ts the orig inal claim. I s the a uthor a scien tific r esearcher? I s an y scien tific 
evidence cited? If the issue was important enough, it might also mean turning to the research literature to 
see if anyone else had studied it. 
Because ther e is o ften not enoug h e vidence to full y e valuate a belief or claim, scien tists also cultiv ate a 
tolerance for uncertainty. The y ac cept tha t ther e ar e man y things tha t the y simpl y do not kno w. F or 
example, it turns out tha t there is no scien tific evidence that receiving an allowance causes children to be 
Science and Common Sense  |  13more financiall y responsible, nor is ther e any scientific e vidence that i t causes them to be ma terialistic. 
Although this kind o f unc ertainty c an be pr oblematic fr om a pr actical perspe ctive—for e xample, making 
it dif ficult to de cide wha t to do when our childr en ask f or an allo wance—it is e xciting fr om a scien tific 
perspective. If we do not know the answer to an interesting and empirically testable question, science, and 
perhaps even you as a researcher, may be able to provide the answer. 
Notes 
1. Bushman, B. J. (2002). Does venting anger feed or extinguish the flame? Catharsis, rumination, distraction, anger, and 
aggressive responding. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 724–731. 
2. Kassin, S. M., & Gudjonsson, G. H. (2004). The psychology of confession evidence: A review of the literature and issues. 
Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 5, 33–67. 
3. Lilienfeld, S. O., Lynn, S. J., Ruscio, J., & Beyerstein, B. L. (2010). 50 great myths of popular psychology. Malden, MA: 
Wiley-Blackwell. 
4. Gilovich, T. (1991). How we know what isn’t so: The fallibility of human reason in everyday life. New York, NY: Free Press. 
5. Mann, T., Tomiyama, A. J., Westling, E., Lew, A., Samuels, B., & Chatman, J. (2007). Medicare’s search for effective 
obesity treatments: Diets are not the answer. American Psychologist, 62, 220–233. 
14  |  Science and Common Sense5.  Experimental and Clinical Psychologists 
Learning Objectives 
1. Define the clinical practice of psychology and distinguish it from experimental psychology. 
2. Explain how science is relevant to clinical practice. 
3. Define the concept of an empirically supported treatment and give some examples. 
Who Conducts Scientific Research in Psychology? 
Experimental Psychologists 
Scientific r esearch in psy chology is g enerally c onducted b y pe ople wi th doc toral degr ees ( usually 
the doctor of philosophy [Ph.D.]) and master’s degrees in psychology and related fields, often supported by 
research assistants with bachelor’s degrees or other r elevant training. Some of them work for government 
agencies (e.g., doing r esearch on the impac t o f public policies ), na tional associa tions (e.g., the Americ an 
Psychological Associa tion), non-pr ofit or ganizations ( e.g., N ational Allianc e on M ental Illness ), or in the 
private sector (e.g., in product marketing and development; organizational behavior). However, the majority 
of them ar e college and univ ersity faculty, who o ften collaborate with their gr aduate and under graduate 
students. Althoug h some r esearchers ar e tr ained and lic ensed as clinicians f or men tal he alth 
work—especially those who c onduct r esearch in clinic al psy chology—the majori ty ar e not. I nstead, the y 
have expertise in one or more of the many other subfields of psychology: behavioral neuroscience, cognitive 
psychology, developmental psychology, personality psychology, social psychology, and so on. Doctoral-level 
researchers might be emplo yed to c onduct research full-time or, like many college and univ ersity faculty 
members, to conduct research in addition to teaching classes and serving their institution and community 
in other ways. 
Of course, people also c onduct research in psy chology because they enjoy the in tellectual and te chnical 
challenges in volved and the sa tisfaction o f c ontributing to scien tific kno wledge o f human beha vior. You 
might find tha t y ou en joy the pr ocess too. I f so, y our c ollege or univ ersity mig ht o ffer oppor tunities to 
get involved in ong oing research as ei ther a r esearch assistant or a par ticipant. Of c ourse, you might find 
that y ou do not en joy the pr ocess o f c onducting scien tific r esearch in psy chology. B ut a t le ast y ou will 
have a be tter understanding o f where scientific knowledge in psy chology comes from, an appr eciation of 
its str engths and limi tations, and an a wareness o f ho w i t c an be applie d to sol ve pr actical pr oblems in 
psychology and everyday life. 
Experimental and Clinical Psychologists  |  15 
Scientific Psychology Blogs 
A fun and easy way to follow current scientific research in psychology is to read any of the many excellent 
blogs devoted to summarizing and commenting on new findings. Among them are the following: 
Research Digest, http://digest.bps.org.uk/ 
Talk Psych, http://www.talkpsych.com/ 
Brain Blogger, http://brainblogger.com/ 
Mind Hacks, http://mindhacks.com/ 
PsyBlog, http://www.spring.org.uk 
You can also browse to http://www.researchblogging.org, select psychology as your topic, and read entries 
from a wide variety of blogs. 
Clinical Psychologists 
Psychology is the scientific study of behavior and mental processes. But it is also the application of scientific 
research to “help pe ople, or ganizations, and c ommunities func tion be tter” ( American P sychological 
Association, 2011) 1. B y far the most c ommon and widel y kno wn applic ation is the 
clinical practice of psychology—the diagnosis and tr eatment o f psy chological disor ders and r elated 
problems. Let us use the term  clinical practice broadly to r efer to the ac tivities of clinical and c ounseling 
psychologists, school psy chologists, marriag e and famil y ther apists, lic ensed clinic al social w orkers, and 
others who work with people individually or in small groups to identify and help address their psychological 
problems. I t is impor tant to c onsider the r elationship be tween scien tific r esearch and clinic al pr actice 
because many students are especially interested in clinical practice, perhaps even as a career. 
The main poin t is tha t psy chological disor ders and other beha vioral pr oblems ar e par t o f the na tural 
world. This means that questions about their nature, causes, and consequences are empirically testable and 
therefore subject to scientific study. As with other questions about human beha vior, we cannot rely on our 
intuition or common sense for detailed and accurate answers. Consider, for example, that dozens of popular 
books and thousands o f websites claim that adult children of alcoholics have a distinct personality profile, 
including low self-esteem, feelings of powerlessness, and dif ficulties with intimacy. Although this sounds 
plausible, scientific research has demonstrated that adult children of alcoholics are no more likely to have 
these problems than an ybody else (Lilienf eld et al., 2010 )2. Similarly, questions about whe ther a par ticular 
psychotherapy is effective are empirically testable questions that can be answered by scientific research. If a 
new psychotherapy is an effective treatment for depression, then systematic observation should reveal that 
depressed people who receive this psychotherapy improve more than a similar gr oup of depressed people 
16  |  Experimental and Clinical Psychologistswho do not r eceive this psychotherapy (or who receive some alternative treatment). Treatments that have 
been shown to work in this way are called empirically supported treatments. 
 
Empirically Supported Treatments 
An empirically supported treatment is one that has been studied scientifically and shown to result in greater 
improvement than no treatment, a placebo, or some alternative treatment. These include many forms of 
psychotherapy, which can be as effective as standard drug therapies. Among the forms of psychotherapy with 
strong empirical support are the following: 
• Acceptance and committment therapy (ACT). for depression, mixed anxiety disorders, psychosis, chronic 
pain, and obsessive-compulsive disorder. 
• Behavioral couples therapy. For alcohol use disorders. 
• Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). For many disorders including eating disorders, depression, anxiety 
disorders, etc. 
• Exposure therapy. For post-traumatic stress disorder and phobias. 
• Exposure therapy with response prevention. For obsessive-compulsive disorder. 
• Family-based treatment. For eating disorders. 
For a more complete list, see the following website, which is maintained by Division 12 of the American 
Psychological Association, the Society for Clinical Psychology: http://www.div12.org/psychological-treatments 
 
Many in the clinic al psychology community have argued that their field has not paid enoug h attention to 
scientific research—for example, by failing to use empiric ally supported treatments—and have suggested 
a variety of changes in the w ay clinicians ar e trained and tr eatments are evaluated and put in to practice. 
Others believe that these claims ar e exaggerated and the sugg ested changes are unnecessary (Norcross, 
Beutler, & Le vant, 2005) 3. On both sides o f the deba te, ho wever, ther e is agr eement tha t a scien tific 
approach to clinical psychology is essential if the goal is to diagnose and treat psychological problems based 
on detailed and accurate knowledge about those pr oblems and the most ef fective treatments for them. So 
not only is it important for scientific research in clinical psychology to continue, but it is also important for 
clinicians who never conduct a scientific study themselves to be scientifically literate so that they can read 
and evaluate new research and make treatment decisions based on the best available evidence. 
Notes 
1. American Psychological Association. (2011). About APA. Retrieved from http://www.apa.org/about 
Experimental and Clinical Psychologists  |  172. Lilienfeld, S. O., Lynn, S. J., Ruscio, J., & Beyerstein, B. L. (2010). 50 great myths of popular psychology. Malden, MA: 
Wiley-Blackwell. 
3. Norcross, J. C., Beutler, L. E., & Levant, R. F. (Eds.). (2005). Evidence-based practices in mental health: Debate and 
dialogue on the fundamental questions. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
18  |  Experimental and Clinical Psychologists6.  Key Takeaways and Exercises 
Key Takeaways 
• Knowledge is acquired in many ways including intuition, authority, rationalism, empiricism, and the 
scientific method 
• Science is a general way of understanding the natural world. Its three fundamental features are 
systematic empiricism, empirical questions, and public knowledge. 
• Psychology is a science because it takes the scientific approach to understanding human behavior. 
• Pseudoscience refers to beliefs and activities that are claimed to be scientific but lack one or more of the 
three features of science. It is important to distinguish the scientific approach to understanding human 
behavior from the many pseudoscientific approaches. 
• Psychologists conduct research in order to describe basic phenomenon, to make predictions about 
future behaviors, and to explain the causes of behavior. 
• Basic research is conducted to learn about human behavior for its own sake, and applied research is 
conducted to solve some practical problem. Both are valuable, and the distinction between the two is not 
always clear-cut. 
• People’s intuitions about human behavior, also known as folk psychology, often turn out to be wrong. This 
is one primary reason that psychology relies on science rather than common sense. 
• Researchers in psychology cultivate certain critical-thinking attitudes. One is skepticism. They search for 
evidence and consider alternatives before accepting a claim about human behavior as true. Another is 
tolerance for uncertainty. They withhold judgment about whether a claim is true or not when there is 
insufficient evidence to decide. 
• Scientific research in psychology is conducted mainly by people with doctoral degrees in psychology and 
related fields, most of whom are college and university faculty members. They do so for professional and 
for personal reasons, as well as to contribute to scientific knowledge about human behavior. Most 
psychologists are experimental psychologists and they conduct research. 
• The clinical practice of psychology—the diagnosis and treatment of psychological problems—is one 
important application of the scientific discipline of psychology. 
• Scientific research is relevant to clinical practice because it provides detailed and accurate knowledge 
about psychological problems and establishes whether treatments are effective. 
Exercises 
• Practice: Consider three things you know and determine how you acquired that knowledge (authority, 
intuition, rationalism, empiricism, the scientific method). 
• Practice: Try to generate different research questions to describe, predict, and explain a phenomenon 
that interests you. 
Key Takeaways and Exercises  |  19• Practice: Based on your own experience or on things you have already learned about psychology, list 
three basic research questions and three applied research questions of interest to you. 
• Practice: List three empirical questions about human behavior. List three nonempirical questions about 
human behavior. 
• Practice: For each of the following intuitive beliefs about human behavior, list three reasons that it might 
be true and three reasons that it might not be true: 
◦ You cannot truly love another person unless you love yourself. 
◦ People who receive “crisis counseling” immediately after experiencing a traumatic event are better 
able to cope with that trauma in the long term. 
◦ Studying is most effective when it is always done in the same location. 
• Watch the following video, in which psychologist Scott Lilienfeld talks about confirmation bias, tunnel 
vision, and using evidence to evaluate the world around us: 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them 
online here: https://kpu.pressbooks.pub/psychmethods4e/?p=250#oembed-2 
◦ Reading in print? Go to https://youtu.be/gKVe0-pWjA0 or scan this QR code with your phone: 
• Discussion: Consider the following psychological claim. “People’s choice of spouse is strongly influenced 
by their perception of their own parents. Some choose a spouse who is similar in some way to one of 
their parents. Others choose a spouse who is different from one of their parents.” Is this claim falsifiable? 
Why or why not? 
• Discussion: People sometimes suggest that psychology cannot be a science because either (a) human 
behavior cannot be predicted with perfect accuracy or (b) much of its subject matter (e.g., thoughts and 
feelings) cannot be observed directly. Do you agree or disagree with each of these ideas? Why? 
• Watch the following video by PHD Comics for an overview of open access publishing and why it matters: 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view 
them online here: https://kpu.pressbooks.pub/psychmethods4e/?p=250#oembed-1 
◦ Reading in print? Go to https://youtu.be/L5rVH1KGBCY or scan this QR code with your phone: 
20  |  Key Takeaways and Exercises• Discussion: Some clinicians argue that what they do is an “art form” based on intuition and personal 
experience and therefore cannot be evaluated scientifically. Write a paragraph about how satisfied you 
would be with such a clinician and why from each of three perspectives: 
◦ a potential client of the clinician 
◦ a judge who must decide whether to allow the clinician to testify as an expert witness in a child 
abuse case 
◦ an insurance company representative who must decide whether to reimburse the clinician for their 
services 
• Practice: Create a short list of questions that a client could ask a clinician to determine whether they pay 
sufficient attention to scientific research. 
Video Attributions 
• ESC 2017 – Scott Lilienfeld: “Tunnel Vision: Confirmation Bias” © ESC European Skeptics Congress is 
licensed under a CC BY (Attribution) license 
• “Open Access Explained!” by Piled Higher and Deeper (PHD Comics). CC BY (Attribution) 
Key Takeaways and Exercises  |  21