CHAPTER  VI 
NON-EXPERIMENTAL RESEARCH 
What do the following classic studies have in common? 
• Stanley Milgram found that about two thirds of his research participants were willing to administer 
dangerous shocks to another person just because they were told to by an authority figure (Milgram, 
1963)1. 
• Elizabeth Loftus and Jacqueline Pickrell showed that it is relatively easy to “implant” false memories in 
people by repeatedly asking them about childhood events that did not actually happen to them (Loftus 
& Pickrell, 1995)2. 
• John Cacioppo and Richard Petty evaluated the validity of their Need for Cognition Scale—a measure of 
the extent to which people like and value thinking—by comparing the scores of university professors 
with those of factory workers (Cacioppo & Petty, 1982)3. 
• David Rosenhan found that confederates who went to psychiatric hospitals claiming to have heard 
voices saying things like “empty” and “thud” were labeled as schizophrenic by the hospital staff and 
kept there even though they behaved normally in all other ways (Rosenhan, 1973)4. 
The answer for purposes o f this chapter is tha t they are not e xperiments. In this chapter , we look mor e 
closely at non-experimental research. We beg in wi th a g eneral defini tion of non-experimental research, 
along with a discussion of when and why non-experimental research is more appropriate than experimental 
research. W e then look separ ately a t t wo impor tant t ypes o f non-e xperimental r esearch: c orrelational 
research and observational research. 
Notes 
1. Milgram, S. (1963). Behavioral study of obedience. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 67, 371–378. 
2. Loftus, E. F., & Pickrell, J. E. (1995). The formation of false memories. Psychiatric Annals, 25, 720–725. 
3. Cacioppo, J. T., & Petty, R. E. (1982). The need for cognition. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 42, 116–131. 
4. Rosenhan, D. L. (1973). On being sane in insane places. Science, 179, 250–258. 
Non-Experimental Research  |  14128.  Overview of Non-Experimental Research 
Learning Objectives 
1. Define non-experimental research, distinguish it clearly from experimental research, and give several 
examples. 
2. Explain when a researcher might choose to conduct non-experimental research as opposed to 
experimental research. 
What Is Non-Experimental Research? 
Non-experimental research is research that lacks the manipulation of an independent variable. Rather than 
manipulating an independent variable, researchers conducting non-experimental research simply measure 
variables as they naturally occur (in the lab or real world). 
Most r esearchers in psy chology c onsider the distinc tion be tween e xperimental and non-e xperimental 
research to be an e xtremely important one. This is be cause althoug h experimental research can provide 
strong evidence that changes in an independen t variable cause differences in a dependen t variable, non-
experimental research generally cannot. As we will see, however, this inabili ty to make causal conclusions 
does not me an that non-experimental research is less impor tant than e xperimental research. It is simpl y 
used in cases where experimental research is not able to be carried out. 
When to Use Non-Experimental Research 
As w e sa w in the last chapter , e xperimental r esearch is appr opriate when the r esearcher has a spe cific 
research question or h ypothesis about a c ausal r elationship be tween t wo v ariables—and i t is possi ble, 
feasible, and e thical to manipula te the independen t v ariable. I t stands to r eason, ther efore, tha t non-
experimental research is appropriate—even necessary—when these conditions are not met. There are many 
times in which non-experimental research is preferred, including when: 
• the research question or hypothesis relates to a single variable rather than a statistical relationship 
between two variables (e.g., how accurate are people’s first impressions?). 
• the research question pertains to a non-causal statistical relationship between variables (e.g., is there a 
correlation between verbal intelligence and mathematical intelligence?). 
• the research question is about a causal relationship, but the independent variable cannot be 
Overview of Non-Experimental Research  |  143manipulated or participants cannot be randomly assigned to conditions or orders of conditions for 
practical or ethical reasons (e.g., does damage to a person’s hippocampus impair the formation of long-
term memory traces?). 
• the research question is broad and exploratory, or is about what it is like to have a particular 
experience (e.g., what is it like to be a working mother diagnosed with depression?). 
Again, the choic e be tween the e xperimental and non-e xperimental appr oaches is g enerally dic tated b y 
the na ture o f the r esearch question. R ecall the thr ee g oals o f scienc e ar e to descri be, to pr edict, and 
to e xplain. I f the g oal is to e xplain and the r esearch question per tains to c ausal r elationships, then the 
experimental approach is t ypically preferred. If the g oal is to descri be or to pr edict, a non-e xperimental 
approach is appr opriate. But the t wo approaches can also be use d to addr ess the same r esearch question 
in c omplementary w ays. F or e xample, in Milgr am’s orig inal ( non-experimental) obe dience stud y, he w as 
primarily interested in one v ariable—the extent to which par ticipants obeyed the researcher when he told 
them to shock the c onfederate—and he obser ved all par ticipants perf orming the same task under the 
same conditions. However, Milgram subsequently conducted experiments to explore the factors that affect 
obedience. He manipulated several independent variables, such as the distanc e between the experimenter 
and the participant, the participant and the confederate, and the location of the study (Milgram, 1974)1. 
Types of Non-Experimental Research 
Non-experimental r esearch falls in to t wo br oad c ategories: c orrelational r esearch and obser vational 
research. 
The most c ommon type of non-experimental research conducted in psy chology is c orrelational research. 
Correlational r esearch is c onsidered non-e xperimental be cause i t f ocuses on the sta tistical r elationship 
between two variables but does not include the manipulation of an independent variable. More specifically, 
in correlational research, the r esearcher me asures t wo v ariables wi th li ttle or no a ttempt to c ontrol 
extraneous v ariables and then assesses the r elationship be tween them. As an e xample, a r esearcher 
interested in the relationship between self-esteem and school achievement could collect data on students’ 
self-esteem and their GPAs to see if the two variables are statistically related. 
Observational r esearch is non-e xperimental be cause i t f ocuses on making obser vations o f beha vior in 
a na tural or labor atory se tting wi thout manipula ting an ything. Milgram’s orig inal obe dience stud y w as 
non-experimental in this w ay. H e w as primaril y in terested in the e xtent to which par ticipants obe yed 
the researcher when he told them to shock the c onfederate and he obser ved all par ticipants performing 
the same task under the same c onditions. The stud y b y Lo ftus and Pickr ell descri bed a t the beg inning 
of this chapter is also a g ood e xample o f obser vational r esearch. The v ariable w as whe ther par ticipants 
“remembered” having experienced mildly traumatic childhood events (e.g., getting lost in a shopping mall) 
that the y had not ac tually e xperienced but tha t the r esearchers ask ed them about r epeatedly. I n this 
particular stud y, ne arly a thir d o f the par ticipants “ remembered” a t le ast one e vent. ( As wi th Milgr am’s 
original study, this study inspired several later experiments on the factors that affect false memories). 
144  |  Overview of Non-Experimental Research 
Cross-Sectional, Longitudinal, and Cross-Sequential Studies 
When psychologists wish to study change over time (for example, when developmental psychologists wish 
to study aging) they usually take one of three non-experimental approaches: cross-sectional, longitudinal, 
or cross-sequential. Cross-sectional studies involve comparing two or more pre-existing groups of people 
(e.g., children at different stages of development). What makes this approach non-experimental is that there 
is no manipulation of an independent variable and no random assignment of participants to groups. Using 
this design, developmental psychologists compare groups of people of different ages (e.g., young adults 
spanning from 18-25 years of age versus older adults spanning 60-75 years of age) on various dependent 
variables (e.g., memory, depression, life satisfaction). Of course, the primary limitation of using this design 
to study the effects of aging is that differences between the groups other than age may account for 
differences in the dependent variable. For instance, differences between the groups may reflect the 
generation that people come from (a cohort effect) rather than a direct effect of age. For this reason, 
longitudinal studies, in which one group of people is followed over time as they age, offer a superior means 
of studying the effects of aging. However, longitudinal studies are by definition more time consuming and 
so require a much greater investment on the part of the researcher and the participants. A third approach, 
known as cross-sequential studies, combines elements of both cross-sectional and longitudinal studies. 
Rather than measuring differences between people in different age groups or following the same people 
over a long period of time, researchers adopting this approach choose a smaller period of time during which 
they follow people in different age groups. For example, they might measure changes over a ten year period 
among participants who at the start of the study fall into the following age groups: 20 years old, 30 years 
old, 40 years old, 50 years old, and 60 years old. This design is advantageous because the researcher reaps 
the immediate benefits of being able to compare the age groups after the first assessment. Further, by 
following the different age groups over time they can subsequently determine whether the original 
differences they found across the age groups are due to true age effects or cohort effects. 
 
The t ypes o f r esearch w e ha ve discusse d so far ar e all quan titative, r eferring to the fac t tha t the da ta 
consist of numbers that are analyzed using statistical techniques. But as you will learn in this chapter, many 
observational research studies ar e more qualitative in na ture. In qualitative research, the da ta are usually 
nonnumerical and therefore cannot be analyzed using statistical techniques. Rosenhan’s observational study 
of the e xperience of people in psy chiatric wards was primarily qualitative. The da ta were the notes tak en 
by the “ pseudopatients”—the pe ople pretending to ha ve he ard v oices—along wi th their hospi tal records. 
Rosenhan’s anal ysis c onsists mainl y o f a wri tten description o f the e xperiences o f the pseudopa tients, 
supported by several concrete examples. To illustrate the hospital staff’s tendency to “depersonalize” their 
patients, he noted, “Upon being admitted, I and other pseudopatients took the initial physical examinations 
in a semi-public r oom, wher e staf f members w ent about their o wn business as if w e w ere not ther e” 
(Rosenhan, 1973, p. 256 )2. Qualitative data has a separ ate set of analysis tools depending on the r esearch 
Overview of Non-Experimental Research  |  145question. For example, thematic analysis would focus on themes tha t emerge in the da ta or c onversation 
analysis would focus on the way the words were said in an interview or focus group. 
Internal Validity Revisited 
Recall tha t in ternal v alidity is the e xtent to which the design o f a stud y suppor ts the c onclusion tha t 
changes in the independen t v ariable c aused an y obser ved dif ferences in the dependen t v ariable. Figure 
6.1 shows ho w e xperimental, quasi-e xperimental, and non-e xperimental ( correlational) r esearch v ary in 
terms of internal validity. Experimental research tends to be hig hest in internal validity because the use of 
manipulation (of the independent variable) and control (of extraneous variables) help to rule out alternative 
explanations for the observed relationships. If the average score on the dependent variable in an experiment 
differs across conditions, it is qui te likely that the independen t variable is r esponsible for that difference. 
Non-experimental (correlational) r esearch is lo west in in ternal v alidity be cause these designs fail to use 
manipulation or c ontrol. Quasi-experimental r esearch ( which will be descri bed in mor e de tail in a 
subsequent chapter ) falls in the middle be cause i t c ontains some, but not all, o f the f eatures o f a true 
experiment. For instance, it may fail to use r andom assignment to assign par ticipants to gr oups or fail to 
use counterbalancing to c ontrol for potential order effects. Imagine, for example, that a r esearcher finds 
two similar schools, star ts an anti-bullying program in one, and then finds f ewer bullying incidents in that 
“treatment school” than in the “control school.” While a comparison is being made with a control condition, 
the inability to randomly assign children to schools c ould still mean that students in the tr eatment school 
differed from students in the control school in some other way that could explain the difference in bullying 
(e.g., there may be a selection effect). 
Figure 6.1 Internal Validity of Correlation, Quasi-Experimental, and Experimental Studies. Experiments are generally high 
in internal validity, quasi-experiments lower, and correlation (non-experimental) studies lower still. 
Notice also in  Figure 6.1  that ther e is some o verlap in the in ternal v alidity o f e xperiments, quasi-
experiments, and c orrelational ( non-experimental) studies. F or e xample, a poor ly designe d e xperiment 
that includes man y c onfounding v ariables c an be lo wer in in ternal v alidity than a w ell-designed quasi-
experiment with no obvious confounding variables. Internal validity is also only one of several validities that 
one might consider, as noted in Chapter 5. 
146  |  Overview of Non-Experimental ResearchNotes 
1. Milgram, S. (1974). Obedience to authority: An experimental view. New York, NY: Harper & Row. 
2. Rosenhan, D. L. (1973). On being sane in insane places. Science, 179, 250–258. 
Overview of Non-Experimental Research  |  14729.  Correlational Research 
Learning Objectives 
1. Define correlational research and give several examples. 
2. Explain why a researcher might choose to conduct correlational research rather than experimental 
research or another type of non-experimental research. 
3. Interpret the strength and direction of different correlation coefficients. 
4. Explain why correlation does not imply causation. 
What Is Correlational Research? 
Correlational r esearch is a t ype o f non-e xperimental r esearch in which the r esearcher me asures t wo 
variables (binary or continuous) and assesses the statistical relationship (i.e., the correlation) between them 
with little or no effort to control extraneous variables. There are many reasons that researchers interested 
in sta tistical r elationships be tween v ariables w ould choose to c onduct a c orrelational stud y r ather than 
an experiment. The first is tha t they do not belie ve that the sta tistical relationship is a c ausal one or ar e 
not interested in c ausal relationships. Recall t wo goals of science are to descri be and to pr edict and the 
correlational research strategy allows researchers to achieve both of these goals. Specifically, this strategy 
can be used to describe the strength and direction of the relationship between two variables and if there is 
a relationship between the variables then the researchers can use scores on one variable to predict scores 
on the other ( using a sta tistical technique called regression, which is discusse d further in the se ction on 
Complex Correlation in this chapter). 
Another reason that researchers would choose to use a c orrelational study rather than an e xperiment is 
that the sta tistical relationship of interest is thoug ht to be c ausal, but the r esearcher cannot manipulate 
the independent variable because it is impossible, impractical, or unethical. For example, while a researcher 
might be in terested in the r elationship be tween the fr equency pe ople use c annabis and their memor y 
abilities they cannot ethically manipulate the fr equency that people use c annabis. As such, the y must r ely 
on the c orrelational research strategy; they must simpl y measure the fr equency that people use c annabis 
and measure their memory abilities using a standar dized test of memory and then de termine whether the 
frequency people use cannabis is statistically related to memory test performance. 
Correlation is also used to establish the reliability and validity of measurements. For example, a researcher 
might evaluate the v alidity of a brief e xtraversion test b y administering i t to a lar ge group of participants 
along with a long er extraversion test that has already been shown to be v alid. This researcher might then 
check to se e whe ther par ticipants’ sc ores on the brief test ar e str ongly c orrelated wi th their sc ores on 
148  |  Correlational Researchthe longer one. N either test sc ore is thoug ht to c ause the other , so ther e is no independen t variable to 
manipulate. I n fac t, the terms  independent variable  and dependent variabl e do not appl y to this kind o f 
research. 
Another strength of correlational research is tha t it is o ften higher in e xternal validity than e xperimental 
research. R ecall ther e is t ypically a tr ade-off be tween in ternal v alidity and e xternal v alidity. As gr eater 
controls are added to experiments, internal validity is increased but often at the expense of external validity 
as artificial conditions are introduced that do not exist in reality. In contrast, correlational studies typically 
have low internal validity because nothing is manipula ted or c ontrolled but the y often have high external 
validity. Since nothing is manipulated or controlled by the experimenter the results are more likely to reflect 
relationships that exist in the real world. 
Finally, extending upon this trade-off between internal and external validity, correlational research can help 
to provide converging evidence for a the ory. If a the ory is suppor ted by a true e xperiment that is hig h in 
internal v alidity as w ell as b y a c orrelational stud y tha t is hig h in e xternal v alidity then the r esearchers 
can ha ve mor e c onfidence in the v alidity o f their the ory. As a c oncrete e xample, c orrelational studies 
establishing that there is a r elationship between watching violent television and aggr essive behavior have 
been complemented by experimental studies c onfirming that the r elationship is a c ausal one (B ushman & 
Huesmann, 2001)1. 
 
Does Correlational Research Always Involve Quantitative Variables? 
A common misconception among beginning researchers is that correlational research must involve two 
quantitative variables, such as scores on two extraversion tests or the number of daily hassles and number 
of symptoms people have experienced. However, the defining feature of correlational research is that the 
two variables are measured—neither one is manipulated—and this is true regardless of whether the 
variables are quantitative or categorical. Imagine, for example, that a researcher administers the Rosenberg 
Self-Esteem Scale to 50 American college students and 50 Japanese college students. Although this “feels” 
like a between-subjects experiment, it is a correlational study because the researcher did not manipulate 
the students’ nationalities. The same is true of the study by Cacioppo and Petty comparing college faculty 
and factory workers in terms of their need for cognition. It is a correlational study because the researchers 
did not manipulate the participants’ occupations. 
Figure 6.2 shows data from a hypothetical study on the relationship between whether people make a daily 
list of things to do (a “to-do list”) and stress. Notice that it is unclear whether this is an experiment or a 
correlational study because it is unclear whether the independent variable was manipulated. If the 
researcher randomly assigned some participants to make daily to-do lists and others not to, then it is an 
experiment. If the researcher simply asked participants whether they made daily to-do lists, then it is a 
correlational study. The distinction is important because if the study was an experiment, then it could be 
Correlational Research  |  149concluded that making the daily to-do lists reduced participants’ stress. But if it was a correlational study, it 
could only be concluded that these variables are statistically related. Perhaps being stressed has a negative 
effect on people’s ability to plan ahead (the directionality problem). Or perhaps people who are more 
conscientious are more likely to make to-do lists and less likely to be stressed (the third-variable problem). 
The crucial point is that what defines a study as experimental or correlational is not the variables being 
studied, nor whether the variables are quantitative or categorical, nor the type of graph or statistics used to 
analyze the data. What defines a study is how the study is conducted. 
 
Figure 6.2 Results of a Hypothetical Study on Whether People Who Make Daily To-Do Lists Experience Less Stress Than 
People Who Do Not Make Such Lists 
Data Collection in Correlational Research 
Again, the defining f eature o f c orrelational r esearch is tha t nei ther v ariable is manipula ted. I t does not 
matter how or where the variables are measured. A researcher could have participants come to a laboratory 
to complete a computerized backward digit span task and a c omputerized risky decision-making task and 
then assess the r elationship between par ticipants’ sc ores on the t wo tasks. Or a r esearcher c ould g o to 
a shopping mall to ask pe ople about their a ttitudes to ward the en vironment and their shopping habi ts 
and then assess the r elationship between these two variables. Both of these studies would be correlational 
because no independent variable is manipulated. 
150  |  Correlational ResearchCorrelations Between Quantitative Variables 
Correlations between quantitative variables are often presented using scatterplots. Figure 6.3 shows some 
hypothetical data on the r elationship between the amoun t of stress people are under and the number o f 
physical symptoms they have. Each point in the scatterplot represents one person’s score on both variables. 
For example, the cir cled point in Figure 6.3 r epresents a person whose str ess score was 10 and who had 
three physical symptoms. T aking all the poin ts into account, one c an see that people under mor e stress 
tend to ha ve more physical symptoms. This is a g ood example of a positive relationship, in which hig her 
scores on one variable tend to be associated with higher scores on the other. In other words, they move in 
the same direction, either both up or both do wn. A negative relationship is one in which hig her scores on 
one variable tend to be associa ted with lower scores on the other . In other w ords, they move in opposi te 
directions. There is a nega tive relationship between stress and immune system func tioning, for example, 
because higher stress is associated with lower immune system functioning. 
 
Figure 6.3 Scatterplot Showing a Hypothetical Positive Relationship Between Stress and Number of Physical Symptoms. The 
circled point represents a person whose stress score was 10 and who had three physical symptoms. Pearson’s r for these data 
is +.51. 
The str ength o f a c orrelation be tween quan titative v ariables is t ypically me asured using a sta tistic 
called Pearson’s Correlation Coefficient (or Pearson's r). As Figure 6.4 shows, Pearson’s r ranges from −1.00 
(the strongest possible negative relationship) to +1.00 (the strongest possible positive relationship). A value 
of 0 me ans ther e is no r elationship be tween the t wo v ariables. W hen P earson’s r is 0 , the poin ts on a 
scatterplot form a shapeless “ cloud.” As i ts value moves toward −1.00 or +1.00, the poin ts come closer and 
closer to falling on a single straight line. Correlation coefficients near ±.10 are considered small, values near 
Correlational Research  |  151± .30 are considered medium, and values near ±.50 are considered large. Notice that the sign of Pearson’s r is 
unrelated to i ts strength. Pearson’s r values of +.30 and −.30 , for example, are equally strong; it is just tha t 
one represents a moderate positive relationship and the other a moder ate negative relationship. With the 
exception of reliability coefficients, most correlations that we find in P sychology are small or moder ate in 
size. The website http://rpsychologist.com/d3/correlation/, created by Kristoffer Magnusson, provides an 
excellent interactive visualization of correlations that permits you to adjust the str ength and direction of a 
correlation while witnessing the corresponding changes to the scatterplot. 
 
Figure 6.4 Range of Pearson’s r, From −1.00 (Strongest Possible Negative Relationship), Through 0 (No Relationship), to +1.00 
(Strongest Possible Positive Relationship) 
There are two common situations in which the value of Pearson’s r can be misleading. Pearson’s r is a good 
measure onl y f or line ar r elationships, in which the poin ts ar e best appr oximated b y a str aight line. I t is 
not a g ood measure for nonlinear relationships, in which the poin ts are better approximated by a cur ved 
line. F igure 6.5, f or e xample, shows a h ypothetical r elationship be tween the amoun t o f sle ep pe ople g et 
per nig ht and their le vel o f depr ession. I n this e xample, the line tha t best appr oximates the poin ts is a 
curve—a kind of upside-down “U”—because people who get about eight hours of sleep tend to be the le ast 
depressed. Those who g et too li ttle sleep and those who g et too much sle ep tend to be mor e depressed. 
Even though Figure 6.5 shows a fairly strong relationship between depression and sleep, Pearson’s r would 
be close to z ero because the poin ts in the sc atterplot are not well fit by a sing le straight line. This me ans 
that it is important to make a scatterplot and confirm that a relationship is approximately linear before using 
Pearson’s r. Nonlinear relationships are fairly common in psychology, but measuring their strength is beyond 
the scope of this book. 
 
152  |  Correlational ResearchFigure 6.5 Hypothetical Nonlinear Relationship Between Sleep and Depression 
The other c ommon situations in which the v alue of Pearson’s r can be misle ading is when one or both o f 
the v ariables ha ve a limi ted r ange in the sample r elative to the popula tion. This pr oblem is r eferred to 
as restriction of range. Assume, f or example, that there is a str ong negative correlation between people’s 
age and their enjoyment of hip hop music as shown by the scatterplot in Figure 6.6. Pearson’s r here is −.77. 
However, if we were to collect data only from 18- to 24-year-olds—represented by the shaded area of Figure 
6.6—then the relationship would seem to be quite weak. In fact, Pearson’s r for this restricted range of ages 
is 0. It is a g ood idea, therefore, to design studies to a void restriction of range. For example, if ag e is one 
of your primary variables, then y ou can plan to c ollect data from people of a wide r ange of ages. Because 
restriction of range is not al ways anticipated or e asily avoidable, however, it is g ood practice to e xamine 
your data for possible restriction of range and to interpret Pearson’s r in light of it. (There are also statistical 
methods to correct Pearson’s r for restriction of range, but they are beyond the scope of this book). 
 
Correlational Research  |  153Figure 6.6 Hypothetical Data Showing How a Strong Overall Correlation Can Appear to Be Weak When One Variable Has a 
Restricted Range. The overall correlation here is −.77, but the correlation for the 18- to 24-year-olds (in the blue box) is 0. 
Correlation Does Not Imply Causation 
You have probably heard repeatedly that “Correlation does not impl y causation.” An amusing e xample of 
this comes from a 2012 study that showed a positive correlation (Pearson’s r = 0.79) between the per capita 
chocolate consumption of a na tion and the number o f Nobel prizes awarded to ci tizens of that nation2. It 
seems clear, however, that this does not mean that eating chocolate causes people to win Nobel prizes, and 
it would not make sense to try to increase the number of Nobel prizes won by recommending that parents 
feed their children more chocolate. 
There ar e t wo r easons tha t c orrelation does not impl y c ausation. The first is c alled 
the directionality problem. Tw o v ariables, X and Y, c an be sta tistically r elated be cause X causes Y or 
because Y causes X. Consider , f or e xample, a stud y sho wing tha t whe ther or not pe ople e xercise is 
statistically r elated to ho w happ y the y ar e—such tha t pe ople who e xercise ar e happier on a verage than 
people who do not. This statistical relationship is consistent with the idea that exercising causes happiness, 
but it is also consistent with the idea that happiness causes exercise. Perhaps being happy gives people more 
energy or leads them to seek opportunities to socialize with others by going to the gym. The second reason 
that correlation does not impl y causation is called the third-variable problem. Two variables, X and Y, can 
be statistically related not be cause X causes Y, or be cause Y causes X, but be cause some thir d variable, Z, 
causes both X and Y. For example, the fact that nations that have won more Nobel prizes tend to have higher 
chocolate consumption probably reflects geography in that European countries tend to have higher rates of 
per capita chocolate consumption and invest more in education and technology (once again, per capita) than 
many other c ountries in the w orld. Similarly, the sta tistical relationship between exercise and happiness 
could mean that some thir d variable, such as ph ysical health, causes both o f the others. Being ph ysically 
154  |  Correlational Researchhealthy could cause people to e xercise and c ause them to be happier . Correlations that are a r esult of a 
third-variable are often referred to as spurious correlations. 
Some e xcellent and amusing e xamples o f spurious c orrelations c an be f ound a t 
http://www.tylervigen.com (Figure 6.7  provides one such example). 
 
Figure 6.7 Example of a Spurious Correlation. Source: http://tylervigen.com/spurious-correlations (CC-BY 4.0) 
“Lots of Candy Could Lead to Violence” 
Although researchers in psychology know that correlation does not imply causation, many journalists do not. 
One website about correlation and causation, http://jonathan.mueller.faculty.noctrl.edu/100/
correlation_or_causation.htm, links to dozens of media reports about real biomedical and psychological 
research. Many of the headlines suggest that a causal relationship has been demonstrated when a careful 
reading of the articles shows that it has not because of the directionality and third-variable problems. 
One such article is about a study showing that children who ate candy every day were more likely than other 
children to be arrested for a violent offense later in life. But could candy really “lead to” violence, as the 
headline suggests? What alternative explanations can you think of for this statistical relationship? How could 
the headline be rewritten so that it is not misleading? 
As you have learned by reading this book, there are various ways that researchers address the directionality 
and third-variable problems. The most effective is to conduct an experiment. For example, instead of simply 
measuring how much people exercise, a researcher could bring people into a laboratory and randomly assign 
half of them to run on a treadmill for 15 minutes and the rest to sit on a couch for 15 minutes. Although this 
seems like a minor change to the research design, it is extremely important. Now if the exercisers end up in 
Correlational Research  |  155more positive moods than those who did not exercise, it cannot be because their moods affected how much 
they exercised (because it was the researcher who used random assignment to determine how much they 
exercised). Likewise, it cannot be because some third variable (e.g., physical health) affected both how much 
they exercised and what mood they were in. Thus experiments eliminate the directionality and third-variable 
problems and allow researchers to draw firm conclusions about causal relationships. 
Media Attributions 
• Nicholas Cage and Pool Drownings © Tyler Viegen is licensed under a CC BY (Attribution) license 
Notes 
1. Bushman, B. J., & Huesmann, L. R. (2001). Effects of televised violence on aggression. In D. Singer & J. Singer (Eds.), 
Handbook of children and the media (pp. 223–254). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
2. Messerli, F. H. (2012). Chocolate consumption, cognitive function, and Nobel laureates. New England Journal of 
Medicine, 367, 1562-1564. 
156  |  Correlational Research30.  Complex Correlation 
Learning Objectives 
1. Explain some reasons that researchers use complex correlational designs. 
2. Create and interpret a correlation matrix. 
3. Describe how researchers can use partial correlation and multiple regression to statistically control for 
third variables. 
 
As w e ha ve alr eady se en, r esearchers c onduct c orrelational studies r ather than e xperiments when the y 
are in terested in nonc ausal r elationships or when the y ar e in terested in c ausal r elationships but the 
independent variable cannot be manipulated for practical or ethical reasons. In this section, we look at some 
approaches to c omplex correlational research that involve measuring several variables and assessing the 
relationships among them. 
Assessing Relationships Among Multiple Variables 
Most complex correlational research involves measuring several variables—either binary or continuous—and 
then assessing the sta tistical r elationships among them. F or e xample, r esearchers N athan Radclif fe and 
William Klein studied a sample of middle-aged adults to see how their level of optimism (measured by using 
a short questionnaire called the Lif e Orientation Test) relates to se veral other v ariables related to ha ving 
a heart attack (Radcliffe & Klein, 200 2)1. These include d their he alth, their kno wledge of heart attack risk 
factors, and their beliefs about their o wn risk o f having a he art attack. They found that more optimistic 
participants w ere he althier (e.g., the y e xercised mor e and had lo wer blood pr essure), kne w about he art 
attack risk factors, and correctly believed their own risk to be lower than that of their peers. 
In another e xample, Ernest Jouriles and his c olleagues me asured adolesc ents’ e xperiences o f ph ysical 
and psychological relationship aggression and their psy chological distress. Because measures of physical 
aggression (such as the Conflict in Adolescent Dating Relationships Inventory and the Relationship Violence 
Interview) often tend to result in highly skewed distributions, the researchers transformed their measures 
of ph ysical aggr ession in to a dichotomous ( i.e., binar y) me asure (0 = did not oc cur, 1 = did oc cur). The y 
did the same wi th their me asures of psychological aggression and then me asured the c orrelations among 
these variables, finding that adolescents who experienced physical aggression were moderately likely to also 
have experienced psychological aggression and tha t experiencing psychological aggression was related to 
symptoms of psychological distress. (Jouriles, Garrido, Rosenfield, & McDonald, 2009)2 
Complex Correlation  |  157This approach is often used to assess the v alidity of new psychological measures. For example, when John 
Cacioppo and Richar d P etty cr eated their N eed f or Cogni tion Sc ale—a me asure o f the e xtent to which 
people like to think and value thinking—they used it to measure the need for cognition for a large sample of 
college students, along with three other variables: intelligence, socially desirable responding (the tendency 
to g ive wha t one thinks is the “ appropriate” r esponse), and dogma tism ( Caccioppo & P etty, 1982) 3. The 
results o f this stud y ar e summariz ed in  Table 6.1, which is a  correlation matrix showing the c orrelation 
(Pearson’s r) between every possi ble pair o f variables in the stud y. For example, the c orrelation between 
the need for cognition and intelligence was +.39, the correlation between intelligence and socially desirable 
responding was +.02, and so on. (Only half the matrix is filled in because the other half would contain exactly 
the same inf ormation. Also, be cause the c orrelation be tween a v ariable and i tself is al ways + 1.00, these 
values are replaced with dashes throughout the matrix.) In this case, the overall pattern of correlations was 
consistent with the researchers’ ideas about how scores on the need for cognition should be related to these 
other constructs. 
 
Table 6.1 Correlation Matrix Showing Correlations Among the Need for Cognition and Thr ee Other Variables 
Based on Research by Cacioppo and Petty (1982) 
Need for cognition Intelligence Social desirability Dogmatism 
Need for cognition — 
Intelligence +.39 — 
Social desirability +.08 +.02 — 
Dogmatism −.27 −.23 +.03 — 
Factor Analysis 
When researchers study relationships among a lar ge number o f conceptually similar v ariables, they often 
use a complex statistical technique called factor analysis. In essence, factor analysis organizes the variables 
into a smaller number o f clusters, such tha t they are strongly correlated wi thin each cluster but w eakly 
correlated between clusters. Each cluster is then in terpreted as multiple measures of the same underlying 
construct. These underlying constructs are also called “factors.” For example, when people perform a wide 
variety of mental tasks, factor analysis typically organizes them into two main factors—one that researchers 
interpret as mathematical intelligence (arithmetic, quantitative estimation, spatial reasoning, and so on) and 
another that they interpret as verbal intelligence (grammar, reading comprehension, vocabulary, and so on). 
The Big Five personality factors have been identified through factor analyses of people’s scores on a lar ge 
number of more specific traits. For example, measures of warmth, gregariousness, activity level, and positive 
emotions tend to be hig hly correlated with each other and ar e interpreted as r epresenting the c onstruct 
of extraversion. As a final e xample, researchers Peter Rentfrow and Samuel Gosling ask ed more than 1,700 
university students to rate how much they liked 14 different popular genres of music (Rentfrow & Gosling, 
2008)4. They then submitted these 14 variables to a factor analysis, which identified four distinct factors. The 
158  |  Complex Correlationresearchers called them Reflective and Complex (blues, jazz, classical, and folk), Intense and Rebellious (rock, 
alternative, and he avy metal), Upbeat and Conventional  (country, soundtrack, religious, pop), and Energetic 
and Rhythmic (rap/hip-hop, soul/funk, and electronica); see Table 6.2. 
 
Table 6.2 F actor Loadings of the 14 M usic Genres on F our Varimax-Rotated Principal Components. Based on 
Research by Rentfrow and Gosling (2003) 
Music-preference dimension 
Genre Reflective and 
Complex 
Intense and 
Rebellious 
Upbeat and 
Conventional 
Energetic and 
Rhythmic 
Blues .85 .01 -.09 .12 
Jazz .83 .04 .07 .15 
Classical .66 .14 .02 -.13 
Folk .64 .09 .15 -.16 
Rock .17 .85 -.04 -.07 
Alternative .02 .80 .13 .04 
Heavy metal .07 .75 -.11 .04 
Country -.06 .05 .72 -.03 
Sound tracks .01 .04 .70 .17 
Religious .23 -.21 .64 -.01 
Pop -.20 .06 .59 .45 
Rap/hip-hop -.19 -.12 .17 .79 
Soul/funk .39 -.11 .11 .69 
Electronica/dance -.02 .15 -.01 .60 
Note. N = 1,704. All factor loadings .40 or larger are in italics; the highest factor loadings for each dimension are listed 
in boldface type. 
 
Two additional points about factor analysis are worth making here. One is tha t factors are not categories. 
Factor anal ysis does not tell us tha t pe ople ar e either extraverted or conscientious or tha t the y 
like either “reflective and complex” music or “intense and rebellious” music. Instead, factors are constructs 
that operate independently of each other. So people who are high in extraversion might be hig h or low in 
conscientiousness, and people who like reflective and complex music mig ht or mig ht not also lik e intense 
and rebellious music. The se cond point is tha t factor analysis reveals only the under lying structure of the 
variables. It is up to researchers to interpret and label the factors and to explain the origin of that particular 
factor struc ture. F or e xample, one r eason tha t e xtraversion and the other B ig F ive oper ate as separ ate 
factors is tha t the y appe ar to be c ontrolled b y dif ferent g enes (P lomin, De Fries, M cClean, & M cGuffin, 
2008)5. 
Complex Correlation  |  159Exploring Causal Relationships 
Another important use of complex correlational research is to explore possible causal relationships among 
variables. This mig ht se em surprising g iven the o ft-quoted sa ying tha t “ correlation does not impl y 
causation.” It is true tha t correlational research cannot unambiguously establish tha t one v ariable causes 
another. Comple x c orrelational r esearch, ho wever, c an o ften be use d to rule out other pla usible 
interpretations. The primary way of doing this is through the statistical control of potential third variables. 
Instead o f c ontrolling these v ariables thr ough r andom assignmen t or b y holding them c onstant as in 
an e xperiment, the r esearcher inste ad me asures them and includes them in the sta tistical anal ysis 
called partial corr elation. U sing this te chnique, r esearchers c an e xamine the r elationship be tween t wo 
variables, while statistically controlling for one or more potential third variables. 
For example, assume a r esearcher was interested in the r elationship between watching violent television 
shows and aggr essive behavior but she w as concerned that socioeconomic status (SES) might represent a 
third variable that is driving this relationship. In this case, she could conduct a study in which she measures 
the amoun t o f violen t tele vision tha t par ticipants w atch in their e veryday lif e, the number o f ac ts o f 
aggression that they have engaged in, and their SES. She could first examine the correlation between violent 
television viewing and aggr ession. Let’s say she f ound a c orrelation of +.35, which w ould be c onsidered a 
moderate sized positive correlation. Next, she c ould use par tial correlation to r eexamine this r elationship 
after statistically controlling for SES. This te chnique would allow her to e xamine the relationship between 
the part of violent television viewing that is independen t of SES and the par t of aggressive behavior that 
is independen t o f SES. I f she f ound tha t the par tial c orrelation be tween violen t tele vision vie wing and 
aggression while c ontrolling f or SES w as +.34, tha t w ould sugg est tha t the r elationship be tween violen t 
television viewing and aggression is largely independent of SES (i.e., SES is not a thir d variable driving this 
relationship). On the other hand, if she f ound tha t af ter sta tistically c ontrolling f or SES the c orrelation 
between violen t tele vision vie wing and aggr ession dr opped to +. 03, then tha t would sugg est tha t SES is 
indeed a third variable that is driving the relationship. If, however, she found that statistically controlling for 
SES reduced the magnitude of the correlation from +.35 to +.20, then this would suggest that SES accounts 
for some, but not all, of the relationship between television violence and aggression. It is important to note 
that while par tial c orrelation provides an impor tant tool f or researchers to sta tistically c ontrol f or third 
variables, researchers using this te chnique are still limi ted in their abili ty to arriv e at causal conclusions 
because this te chnique does not tak e c are o f the dir ectionality pr oblem and ther e ma y be other thir d 
variables driving the relationship that the researcher did not consider and statistically control. 
Regression 
Once a r elationship between two variables has be en established, researchers can use tha t information to 
make predictions about the v alue of one v ariable g iven the v alue of another v ariable. For, instance, once 
we ha ve establishe d tha t ther e is a c orrelation be tween I Q and GP A w e c an use pe ople’s I Q sc ores to 
predict their GPA. Thus, while correlation coefficients can be used to describe the strength and direction of 
relationships between variables, regression is a statistical technique that allows researchers to predict one 
160  |  Complex Correlationvariable given another. Regression can also be used to describe more complex relationships between more 
than two variables. Typically the variable that is used to make the prediction is referred to as the predictor 
variable and the v ariable that is being pr edicted is c alled the outcome variable or cri terion variable. This 
regression equation has the following general form: 
 
Y = b1X1 
 
 Y in this formula represents the person’s predicted score on the outcome variable, b1  represents the slope 
of the line depic ting the r elationship between two variables (or the r egression weight), and X 1 represents 
the person’s score on the pr edictor variable. You can see that to pr edict a person ’s score on the outc ome 
variable (Y), one simply needs to multiply their score on the predictor variable (X) by the regression weight 
(b1 ) 
While simple r egression involves using one v ariable to pr edict another , multiple r egression involves 
measuring several variables (X1, X2, X3,…Xi), and using them to predict some outcome variable (Y). Multiple 
regression can also be use d to simply describe the relationship between a sing le outcome variable (Y) and 
a se t o f pr edictor v ariables ( X1, X 2, X3,…X i). The r esult o f a multiple r egression anal ysis is an e quation 
that expresses the outcome variable as an addi tive combination of the predictor variables. This regression 
equation has the following general form: 
 
Y = b1X1+ b2X2+ b3X3+ … + biXi 
 
The r egression w eights ( b1, b2, and so on ) indic ate ho w lar ge a c ontribution a pr edictor v ariable mak es, 
on average, to the pr ediction of the outc ome variable. Specifically, they indicate how much the outc ome 
variable changes for each one-unit change in the predictor variable. 
The advantage of multiple regression is that it can show whether a predictor variable makes a contribution 
to an outc ome variable over and above  the contributions made b y other pr edictor variables (i.e., it can be 
used to show whether a predictor variable is related to an outcome variable after statistically controlling for 
other predictor variables). As a hypothetical example, imagine that a researcher wants to know how income 
and health relate to happiness. This is tricky be cause income and he alth are themselves related to e ach 
other. Thus if people with greater incomes tend to be happier, then perhaps this is only because they tend 
to be healthier. Likewise, if people who are healthier tend to be happier , perhaps this is onl y because they 
tend to make more money. But a multiple regression analysis including both income and health as predictor 
variables would show whether each one makes a contribution to the prediction of happiness when the other 
is taken into account (when it is sta tistically controlled). In other w ords, multiple r egression would allow 
the researcher to e xamine whether that part of income that is unr elated to he alth predicts or r elates to 
happiness as well as whether that part of health that is unrelated to income predicts or relates to happiness. 
Complex Correlation  |  161Research like this, b y the w ay, has sho wn both inc ome and he alth make extremely small c ontributions to 
happiness except in the case of severe poverty or illness (Diener, 20006). 
The e xamples discusse d in this se ction onl y scr atch the surfac e o f ho w r esearchers use c omplex 
correlational r esearch to e xplore possi ble c ausal r elationships among v ariables. I t is impor tant to k eep 
in mind, ho wever, that purely correlational approaches cannot unambiguously establish tha t one v ariable 
causes another. The best they can do is show patterns of relationships that are consistent with some causal 
interpretations and inconsistent with others. 
Notes 
1. Radcliffe, N. M., & Klein, W. M. P. (2002). Dispositional, unrealistic, and comparative optimism: Differential relations 
with knowledge and processing of risk information and beliefs about personal risk. Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 28, 836–846. 
2. Jouriles, E. N., Garrido, E., Rosenfield, D., & McDonald, R. (2009). Experiences of psychological and physical aggression 
in adolescent romantic relationships: Links to psychological distress. Child Abuse & Neglect, 33(7), 451–460. 
3. Cacioppo, J. T., & Petty, R. E. (1982). The need for cognition. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 42, 116–131. 
4. Rentfrow, P. J., & Gosling, S. D. (2008). The do re mi’s of everyday life: The structure and personality correlates of 
music preferences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 1236–1256. 
5. Plomin, R., DeFries, J. C., McClearn, G. E., & McGuffin, P. (2008). Behavioral genetics (5th ed.). New York, NY: Worth. 
6. Diener, E. (2000). Subjective well-being: The science of happiness, and a proposal for a national index. American 
Psychologist, 55, 34–43. 
162  |  Complex Correlation31.  Qualitative Research 
Learning Objectives 
1. List several ways in which qualitative research differs from quantitative research in psychology. 
2. Describe the strengths and weaknesses of qualitative research in psychology compared with quantitative 
research. 
3. Give examples of qualitative research in psychology. 
What Is Qualitative Research? 
This te xtbook is primaril y about  quantitative research, in par t be cause most studies c onducted in 
psychology ar e quan titative in na ture. Quan titative r esearchers t ypically star t wi th a f ocused r esearch 
question or h ypothesis, c ollect a small amoun t o f numeric al da ta fr om a lar ge number o f individuals, 
describe the r esulting da ta using sta tistical te chniques, and dr aw g eneral c onclusions about some lar ge 
population. Although this me thod is b y far the most c ommon approach to c onducting empirical research 
in psychology, there is an important alternative called qualitative research. Qualitative research originated 
in the disciplines o f an thropology and sociolog y but is no w use d to stud y psy chological topics as w ell. 
Qualitative r esearchers g enerally beg in wi th a less f ocused r esearch question, c ollect lar ge amoun ts o f 
relatively “ unfiltered” da ta fr om a r elatively small number o f individuals, and descri be their da ta using 
nonstatistical te chniques, such as gr ounded the ory, thema tic anal ysis, cri tical disc ourse anal ysis, or 
interpretative phenomenological analysis. They are usually less concerned with drawing general conclusions 
about human behavior than with understanding in detail the experience of their research participants. 
Consider, for example, a stud y by researcher Per Lindqvist and his c olleagues, who w anted to le arn how 
the families of teenage suicide victims cope with their loss (Lindq vist, Johansson, & Karlsson, 2008)1. They 
did not have a specific research question or h ypothesis, such as, W hat percentage of family members join 
suicide support groups? Instead, they wanted to understand the variety of reactions that families had, with 
a focus on wha t i t is lik e from their perspectives. To address this question, the y interviewed the families 
of 10 teenage suicide victims in their homes in rur al Sweden. The interviews were relatively unstructured, 
beginning with a general request for the families to talk about the vic tim and ending wi th an invitation to 
talk about an ything else tha t they wanted to tell the in terviewer. One o f the most impor tant themes tha t 
emerged from these interviews was that even as life returned to “normal,” the families continued to struggle 
with the question of why their loved one committed suicide. This struggle appeared to be especially difficult 
for families in which the suicide was most unexpected. 
Qualitative Research  |  163The Purpose of Qualitative Research 
Again, this te xtbook is primaril y about quan titative r esearch in psy chology. The str ength o f quan titative 
research is i ts abili ty to pr ovide pr ecise answ ers to spe cific r esearch questions and to dr aw g eneral 
conclusions about human behavior. This method is how we know that people have a strong tendency to obey 
authority figures, for example, and that female undergraduate students are not substantially more talkative 
than male undergraduate students. But while quantitative research is good at providing precise answers to 
specific research questions, it is not nearly as good at generating novel and interesting research questions. 
Likewise, while quantitative research is good at drawing general conclusions about human behavior, it is not 
nearly as good at providing detailed descriptions of the behavior of particular groups in particular situations. 
And quantitative research is not v ery good at communicating what it is ac tually like to be a member o f a 
particular group in a particular situation. 
But the r elative w eaknesses o f quan titative r esearch ar e the r elative str engths o f quali tative r esearch. 
Qualitative r esearch c an help r esearchers to g enerate ne w and in teresting r esearch questions and 
hypotheses. The r esearch of Lindqvist and c olleagues, for example, suggests that there may be a g eneral 
relationship between how unexpected a suicide is and how consumed the family is with trying to understand 
why the te en committed suicide. This r elationship can now be e xplored using quan titative research. But 
it is uncle ar whether this question w ould have arisen at all wi thout the researchers sitting down with the 
families and listening to wha t they themselves wanted to sa y about their e xperience. Qualitative research 
can also pr ovide rich and de tailed descriptions o f human beha vior in the r eal-world contexts in which i t 
occurs. Among qualitative researchers, this depth is o ften referred to as “thick description” (Geertz, 1973)2.
Similarly, qualitative research can convey a sense o f what it is actually like to be a member o f a par ticular 
group or in a par ticular situation—what qualitative researchers often refer to as the “liv ed experience” of 
the research participants. Lindqvist and colleagues, for example, describe how all the families spontaneously 
offered to sho w the in terviewer the vic tim’s bedroom or the plac e where the suicide oc curred—revealing 
the importance of these physical locations to the families. It seems unlikely that a quantitative study would 
have discovered this detail. 
 
Table 6.3 Some contrasts between qualitative and quantitative research 
Qualitative Quantitative 
1. In-depth information about relatively few people 1. Less depth information with larger samples 
2. Conclusions are based on interpretations drawn by the 
investigator 2. Conclusions are based on statistical analyses 
3. Global and exploratory 3. Specific and focused 
164  |  Qualitative ResearchData Collection and Analysis in Qualitative Research 
Data collection approaches in qualitative research are quite varied and can involve naturalistic observation, 
participant obser vation, ar chival da ta, ar twork, and man y other things. B ut one o f the most c ommon 
approaches, espe cially f or psy chological r esearch, is to c onduct interviews. I nterviews in quali tative 
research c an be unstruc tured—consisting o f a small number o f g eneral questions or pr ompts tha t allow 
participants to talk about wha t is of interest to them—or struc tured, where there is a stric t script that the 
interviewer does not deviate from. Most interviews are in between the two and are called semi-structured 
interviews, where the researcher has a few consistent questions and can follow up by asking more detailed 
questions about the topics that come up. Such interviews can be lengthy and detailed, but they are usually 
conducted with a relatively small sample. The unstruc tured interview was the approach used by Lindqvist 
and colleagues in their research on the families of suicide victims because the researchers were aware that 
how much was disclosed about such a sensitive topic should be led by the families, not by the researchers. 
Another appr oach use d in quali tative r esearch involves small gr oups o f pe ople who par ticipate tog ether 
in in terviews f ocused on a par ticular topic or issue, kno wn as focus gr oups. The in teraction among 
participants in a f ocus gr oup c an some times bring out mor e inf ormation than c an be le arned in a one-
on-one in terview. The use o f f ocus gr oups has be come a standar d te chnique in business and industr y 
among those who w ant to understand c onsumer tastes and pr eferences. The c ontent of all f ocus group 
interviews is usuall y recorded and tr anscribed to facili tate later analyses. However, we know from social 
psychology that group dynamics are often at play in any group, including focus groups, and it is useful to be 
aware of those possi bilities. For example, the desir e to be lik ed by others c an lead participants to pr ovide 
inaccurate answers that they believe will be perceived favorably by the other participants. The same may be 
said for personality characteristics. For example, highly extraverted participants can sometimes dominate 
discussions within focus groups. 
Data Analysis in Qualitative Research 
Although quan titative and quali tative r esearch g enerally dif fer along se veral impor tant dimensions ( e.g., 
the specificity of the r esearch question, the t ype of data collected), it is the me thod of data analysis that 
distinguishes them mor e clearly than an ything else. T o illustrate this ide a, imagine a te am of researchers 
that conducts a series of unstructured interviews with people recovering from alcohol use disorder to learn 
about the role of their religious faith in their recovery. Although this project sounds like qualitative research, 
imagine further that once they collect the data, they code the data in terms o f how often each participant 
mentions God ( or a “hig her po wer”), and the y then use descriptiv e and inf erential sta tistics to find out 
whether those who mention God more often are more successful in abstaining from alcohol. Now it sounds 
like quantitative research. In other w ords, the quan titative-qualitative distinction depends mor e on wha t 
researchers do with the data they have collected than with why or how they collected the data. 
But what does qualitative data analysis look like? Just as ther e are many ways to collect data in qualitative 
research, ther e ar e man y w ays to anal yze da ta. H ere w e f ocus on one g eneral appr oach 
Qualitative Research  |  165called grounded theory (Glaser & Strauss, 1967)3. This approach was developed within the field of sociology 
in the 1960s and has gr adually gained popularity in psychology. Remember that in quantitative research, it 
is typical for the r esearcher to star t with a the ory, derive a h ypothesis from that theory, and then c ollect 
data to test tha t specific hypothesis. In qualitative research using grounded theory, researchers start with 
the data and de velop a the ory or an in terpretation that is “ grounded in” those da ta. They do this anal ysis 
in stages. First, they identify ideas that are repeated throughout the da ta. Then the y organize these ide as 
into a smaller number o f broader themes. F inally, they write a theoretical narrative—an interpretation of 
the data in terms of the themes that they have identified. This theoretical narrative focuses on the subjective 
experience of the par ticipants and is usuall y suppor ted by many direct quotations from the par ticipants 
themselves. 
As an e xample, consider a stud y by researchers Laura Abrams and L aura Curran, who use d the gr ounded 
theory approach to study the experience of postpartum depression symptoms among low-income mothers 
(Abrams & Curran, 2009)4. Their data were the result of unstructured interviews with 19 participants. Table 
6.4 shows the fiv e br oad themes the r esearchers iden tified and the mor e spe cific r epeating ide as tha t 
made up e ach o f those themes. I n their r esearch r eport, the y pr ovide numer ous quota tions fr om their 
participants, such as this one from “Destiny:” 
Well, just recently my apartment was broken into and the fact that his Medicaid for some reason was 
cancelled so a lot of things was happening within the last two weeks all at one time. So that in itself I 
don’t want to say almost drove me mad but it put me in a funk.…Like I really was depressed. (p. 357) 
Their theoretical narrative focused on the par ticipants’ experience of their symptoms, not as an abstr act 
“affective disorder” but as closel y tied to the dail y struggle of raising children alone under o ften difficult 
circumstances. 
 
Table 6.4 Themes and Repeating Ideas in a Study of Postpartum Depression Among Low-Income 
Mothers. Based on Research by Abrams and Curran (2009). 
Theme Repeating ideas 
Ambivalence “I wasn’t prepared for this baby,” “I didn’t want to have any more children.” 
Caregiving overload “Please stop crying,” “I need a break,” “I can’t do this anymore.” 
Juggling “No time to breathe,” “Everyone depends on me,” “Navigating the maze.” 
Mothering alone “I really don’t have any help,” “My baby has no father.” 
Real-life worry “I don’t have any money,” “Will my baby be OK?” “It’s not safe here.” 
The Quantitative-Qualitative “Debate” 
Given their differences, it may come as no surprise that quantitative and qualitative research in psychology 
and related fields do not c oexist in c omplete harmony. Some quan titative researchers criticize qualitative 
methods on the grounds that they lack objectivity, are difficult to evaluate in terms of reliability and validity, 
166  |  Qualitative Researchand do not allow generalization to people or situations other than those actually studied. At the same time, 
some qualitative researchers criticize quantitative methods on the grounds that they overlook the richness 
of human behavior and experience and instead answer simple questions about easily quantifiable variables. 
In general, however, qualitative researchers are well aware of the issues of objectivity, reliability, validity, and 
generalizability. In fact, they have developed a number o f frameworks for addressing these issues ( which 
are be yond the sc ope o f our discussion ). And in g eneral, quan titative r esearchers ar e w ell a ware o f the 
issue of oversimplification. They do not belie ve that all human beha vior and experience can be adequately 
described in terms of a small number of variables and the statistical relationships among them. Instead, they 
use simplification as a strategy for uncovering general principles of human behavior. 
Many researchers from both the quan titative and quali tative c amps now agree that the t wo approaches 
can and should be c ombined in to wha t has c ome to be c alled mixed-methods research (Todd, N erlich, 
McKeown, & Clar ke, 2004)5. (In fact, the studies b y Lindqvist and c olleagues and b y Abrams and Curr an 
both c ombined quan titative and quali tative appr oaches.) One appr oach to c ombining quan titative and 
qualitative r esearch is to use quali tative r esearch f or h ypothesis g eneration and quan titative r esearch 
for h ypothesis testing. Again, while a quali tative stud y mig ht sugg est tha t families who e xperience an 
unexpected suicide have more difficulty resolving the question o f why, a well-designed quantitative study 
could test a h ypothesis b y me asuring these spe cific v ariables in a lar ge sample. A se cond appr oach to 
combining quan titative and quali tative r esearch is r eferred to as  triangulation. The ide a is to use both 
quantitative and quali tative methods simultaneously to stud y the same g eneral questions and to c ompare 
the r esults. I f the r esults o f the quan titative and quali tative me thods c onverge on the same g eneral 
conclusion, they reinforce and enrich each other. If the results diverge, then they suggest an interesting new 
question: Why do the results diverge and how can they be reconciled? 
Using qualitative research can often help clarif y quantitative results via triangula tion. Trenor, Yu, Waight, 
Zerda, and Sha (2008)6 investigated the experience of female engineering students at a university. In the first 
phase, female engineering students were asked to c omplete a sur vey, where they rated a number o f their 
perceptions, including their sense of belonging.  Their results were compared across the student ethnicities, 
and statistically, the various ethnic groups showed no differences in their ratings of their sense of belonging. 
 One might look at that result and conclude that ethnicity does not have anything to do with one’s sense of 
belonging.  However, in the second phase, the authors also conducted interviews with the students, and in 
those interviews, many minority students reported how the diversity of cultures at the university enhanced 
their sense o f belonging. Without the quali tative component, we might have drawn the wr ong conclusion 
about the quantitative results. 
This example shows how qualitative and quantitative research work together to help us understand human 
behavior. Some r esearchers ha ve char acterized quali tative r esearch as best f or iden tifying beha viors or 
the phenomenon wher eas quan titative r esearch is best f or understanding me aning or iden tifying the 
mechanism. H owever, B ryman (2012) 7 argues f or br eaking do wn the divide be tween these arbi trarily 
different ways of investigating the same questions. 
Qualitative Research  |  167Notes 
1. Lindqvist, P., Johansson, L., & Karlsson, U. (2008). In the aftermath of teenage suicide: A qualitative study of the 
psychosocial consequences for the surviving family members. BMC Psychiatry, 8, 26. Retrieved from 
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-244X/8/26 
2. Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures. New York, NY: Basic Books. 
3. Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative research. Chicago, IL: 
Aldine. 
4. Abrams, L. S., & Curran, L. (2009). “And you’re telling me not to stress?” A grounded theory study of postpartum 
depression symptoms among low-income mothers. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 33, 351–362. 
5. Todd, Z., Nerlich, B., McKeown, S., & Clarke, D. D. (2004) Mixing methods in psychology: The integration of qualitative 
and quantitative methods in theory and practice. London, UK: Psychology Press. 
6. Trenor, J.M., Yu, S.L., Waight, C.L., Zerda. K.S & Sha T.-L. (2008). The relations of ethnicity to female engineering 
students’ educational experiences and college and career plans in an ethnically diverse learning environment. Journal 
of Engineering Education, 97(4), 449-465. 
7. Bryman, A. (2012). Social Research Methods, 4th ed. Oxford: OUP. 
168  |  Qualitative Research32.  Observational Research 
Learning Objectives 
1. List the various types of observational research methods and distinguish between each. 
2. Describe the strengths and weakness of each observational research method. 
What Is Observational Research? 
The term observational research is used to refer to several different types of non-experimental studies in 
which behavior is systematically observed and recorded. The goal of observational research is to descri be 
a v ariable or se t o f v ariables. M ore g enerally, the g oal is to obtain a snapshot o f spe cific char acteristics 
of an individual, gr oup, or se tting. As descri bed pr eviously, obser vational r esearch is non-e xperimental 
because nothing is manipulated or controlled, and as such we cannot arrive at causal conclusions using this 
approach. The da ta that are collected in obser vational research studies ar e often qualitative in na ture but 
they may also be quan titative or both ( mixed-methods). There are several different types of observational 
methods that will be described below. 
Naturalistic Observation 
Naturalistic observation is an obser vational me thod tha t in volves obser ving pe ople’s beha vior in the 
environment in which i t t ypically oc curs. Thus na turalistic obser vation is a t ype o f field r esearch ( as 
opposed to a t ype o f labor atory r esearch). J ane Goodall’ s famous r esearch on chimpanz ees is a classic 
example of naturalistic observation. Dr. Goodall spent three decades observing chimpanzees in their natural 
environment in East Afric a. She e xamined such things as chimpanz ee’s social struc ture, mating patterns, 
gender roles, family structure, and c are of offspring by observing them in the wild. H owever, naturalistic 
observation could mor e simpl y in volve obser ving shoppers in a gr ocery stor e, childr en on a school 
playground, or psychiatric inpatients in their wards. Researchers engaged in naturalistic observation usually 
make their observations as unobtrusively as possible so that participants are not aware that they are being 
studied. Such an approach is called disguised naturalistic observation. Ethically, this method is considered 
to be ac ceptable if the par ticipants remain anonymous and the beha vior occurs in a public se tting where 
people w ould not normall y ha ve an e xpectation o f priv acy. Gr ocery shoppers put ting i tems in to their 
shopping carts, for example, are engaged in public behavior that is easily observable by store employees and 
other shoppers. F or this r eason, most r esearchers would consider it ethically acceptable to obser ve them 
Observational Research  |  169for a stud y. On the other hand, one o f the ar guments against the e thicality of the naturalistic observation 
of “bathroom behavior” discussed earlier in the book is that people have a reasonable expectation of privacy 
even in a public restroom and that this expectation was violated. 
In cases where it is not e thical or pr actical to c onduct disguised naturalistic observation, researchers can 
conduct undisguised na turalistic obser vation where the par ticipants ar e made a ware o f the r esearcher 
presence and monitoring of their behavior. However, one concern with undisguised naturalistic observation 
is reactivity. Reactivity refers to when a measure changes participants’ behavior. In the case of undisguised 
naturalistic obser vation, the c oncern wi th r eactivity is tha t when pe ople kno w the y ar e being obser ved 
and studie d, the y ma y ac t dif ferently than the y normall y w ould. This t ype o f r eactivity is kno wn as the 
Hawthorne effect. For instance, you may act much differently in a bar if you know that someone is observing 
you and r ecording y our beha viors and this w ould in validate the stud y. So disguise d obser vation is less 
reactive and therefore can have higher validity because people are not aware that their behaviors are being 
observed and recorded. However, we now know that people often become used to being observed and with 
time they begin to behave naturally in the researcher’s presence. In other words, over time people habituate 
to being observed. Think about reality shows like Big Brother or Survivor where people are constantly being 
observed and recorded. While they may be on their best beha vior at first, in a fair ly short amount of time 
they are flirting, having sex, wearing next to nothing, screaming at each other, and occasionally behaving in 
ways that are embarrassing. 
Participant Observation 
Another appr oach to da ta c ollection in obser vational r esearch is par ticipant obser vation. 
In participant observation, r esearchers be come ac tive par ticipants in the gr oup or si tuation the y ar e 
studying. P articipant obser vation is v ery similar to na turalistic obser vation in tha t i t in volves obser ving 
people’s beha vior in the en vironment in which i t t ypically oc curs. As wi th na turalistic obser vation, the 
data tha t ar e c ollected c an include in terviews (usually unstruc tured), notes base d on their obser vations 
and in teractions, documen ts, photogr aphs, and other ar tifacts. The onl y dif ference be tween na turalistic 
observation and par ticipant obser vation is tha t r esearchers engag ed in par ticipant obser vation be come 
active members of the group or situations they are studying. The basic rationale for participant observation 
is that there may be important information that is only accessible to, or can be interpreted only by, someone 
who is an active participant in the group or situation. Like naturalistic observation, participant observation 
can be either disguised or undisguised. In disguised participant observation, the researchers pretend to be 
members of the social group they are observing and conceal their true identity as researchers. 
In a famous e xample o f disguise d par ticipant obser vation, Le on F estinger and his c olleagues infiltr ated 
a doomsda y cult kno wn as the Se ekers, whose members belie ved tha t the apoc alypse w ould oc cur on 
December 21, 1954. Interested in studying how members of the group would cope psychologically when the 
prophecy inevitably failed, they carefully recorded the events and reactions of the cult members in the days 
before and after the supposed end of the world. Unsurprisingly, the cult members did not give up their belief 
but instead convinced themselves that it was their faith and efforts that saved the world from destruction. 
170  |  Observational ResearchFestinger and his colleagues later published a book about this experience, which they used to illustrate the 
theory of cognitive dissonance (Festinger, Riecken, & Schachter, 1956)1. 
In contrast with undisguised participant observation, the researchers become a part of the group they are 
studying and they disclose their true iden tity as researchers to the gr oup under investigation. Once again 
there ar e impor tant e thical issues to c onsider wi th disguise d par ticipant obser vation. First no inf ormed 
consent can be obtained and second deception is being use d. The researcher is deceiving the participants 
by intentionally withholding information about their motiv ations for being a par t of the social gr oup they 
are stud ying. B ut some times disguise d par ticipation is the onl y w ay to ac cess a pr otective gr oup (lik e a 
cult). F urther, disguised par ticipant obser vation is less pr one to r eactivity than undisguise d par ticipant 
observation. 
Rosenhan’s study (1973)2 of the e xperience of people in a psy chiatric ward would be c onsidered disguised 
participant observation because Rosenhan and his pseudopatients were admitted into psychiatric hospitals 
on the pretense of being patients so that they could observe the way that psychiatric patients are treated by 
staff. The staff and other patients were unaware of their true identities as researchers. 
Another example of participant observation comes from a study by sociologist Amy Wilkins on a university-
based religious organization that emphasized how happy its members were (Wilkins, 2008)3. Wilkins spent 
12 months attending and participating in the group’s meetings and social events, and she interviewed several 
group members. In her study, Wilkins identified several ways in which the group “enforced” happiness—for 
example, b y c ontinually talking about happiness, disc ouraging the e xpression o f nega tive emotions, and 
using happiness as a way to distinguish themselves from other groups. 
One of the primary benefits of participant observation is that the researchers are in a much better position 
to understand the vie wpoint and e xperiences of the pe ople they are studying when the y are a par t of the 
social group. The primar y limi tation wi th this appr oach is tha t the mer e presence of the obser ver could 
affect the behavior of the people being observed. While this is also a concern with naturalistic observation, 
additional concerns arise when r esearchers become active members of the social gr oup they are studying 
because that they may change the social d ynamics and/or influence the beha vior of the pe ople they are 
studying. S imilarly, if the r esearcher ac ts as a par ticipant obser ver ther e c an be c oncerns wi th biases 
resulting from developing relationships with the participants. Concretely, the researcher may become less 
objective resulting in more experimenter bias. 
Structured Observation 
Another observational method is structured observation. Here the investigator makes careful observations 
of one or mor e spe cific beha viors in a par ticular se tting tha t is mor e struc tured than the se ttings use d 
in naturalistic or par ticipant observation. Often the se tting in which the obser vations are made is not the 
natural setting. Instead, the researcher may observe people in the laboratory environment. Alternatively, the 
researcher may observe people in a natural setting (like a classroom setting) that they have structured some 
way, for instance by introducing some specific task participants are to engage in or by introducing a specific 
social situation or manipulation. 
Observational Research  |  171Structured observation is v ery similar to na turalistic observation and par ticipant observation in tha t in all 
three cases researchers are observing naturally occurring behavior; however, the emphasis in struc tured 
observation is on ga thering quantitative rather than quali tative data. Researchers using this appr oach are 
interested in a limi ted se t o f beha viors. This allo ws them to quan tify the beha viors the y ar e obser ving. 
In other w ords, structured observation is less g lobal than na turalistic or par ticipant observation because 
the researcher engaged in struc tured obser vations is in terested in a small number o f specific behaviors. 
Therefore, r ather than r ecording e verything tha t happens, the r esearcher onl y f ocuses on v ery spe cific 
behaviors of interest. 
Researchers R obert Le vine and Ar a N orenzayan use d struc tured obser vation to stud y dif ferences in the 
“pace o f lif e” acr oss c ountries (Le vine & N orenzayan, 1999 )4. One o f their me asures in volved obser ving 
pedestrians in a lar ge city to se e how long i t took them to w alk 60 f eet. They found that people in some 
countries walked reliably faster than people in other countries. For example, people in Canada and Sweden 
covered 60 f eet in just under 13 se conds on a verage, while pe ople in B razil and R omania took close to 
17 se conds. W hen struc tured obser vation takes plac e in the c omplex and e ven chaotic “ real w orld,” the 
questions of when, where, and under wha t conditions the observations will be made, and who e xactly will 
be observed are important to consider. Levine and Norenzayan described their sampling process as follows: 
“Male and f emale walking speed over a distanc e of 60 f eet was measured in a t least two locations 
in main do wntown ar eas in e ach ci ty. M easurements w ere tak en during main business hours on 
clear summer days. All locations were flat, unobstructed, had broad sidewalks, and were sufficiently 
uncrowded to allo w pedestrians to mo ve at potentially maximum spe eds. To control for the ef fects 
of socializing, only pedestrians walking alone were used. Children, individuals with obvious physical 
handicaps, and window-shoppers were not timed. Thirty-five men and 35 women were timed in most 
cities.” (p. 186). 
Precise spe cification o f the sampling pr ocess in this w ay mak es da ta c ollection manag eable f or the 
observers, and i t also provides some control over important extraneous variables. For example, by making 
their obser vations on cle ar summer da ys in all c ountries, Le vine and N orenzayan c ontrolled f or ef fects 
of the w eather on pe ople’s walking speeds. In Levine and N orenzayan’s study, measurement was relatively 
straightforward. The y simpl y me asured out a 60- foot distanc e along a ci ty side walk and then use d a 
stopwatch to time participants as they walked over that distance. 
As another example, researchers Robert Kraut and Robert Johnston wanted to study bowlers’ reactions to 
their shots, both when the y w ere facing the pins and then when the y turne d to ward their c ompanions 
(Kraut & Johnston, 1979)5. But what “reactions” should they observe? Based on previous research and their 
own pilot testing, Kr aut and Johnston created a list o f reactions that included “closed smile,” “open smile,” 
“laugh,” “ neutral fac e,” “look do wn,” “look a way,” and “fac e c over” (covering one ’s fac e wi th one ’s hands ). 
The observers committed this list to memor y and then pr acticed by coding the r eactions of bowlers who 
had be en vide otaped. During the ac tual stud y, the obser vers spok e in to an a udio r ecorder, descri bing 
the r eactions the y obser ved. Among the most in teresting r esults o f this stud y w as tha t bo wlers r arely 
smiled while they still faced the pins. The y were much more likely to smile af ter they turned toward their 
companions, sugg esting tha t smiling is not pur ely an e xpression o f happiness but also a f orm o f social 
communication. 
172  |  Observational ResearchIn yet another example (this one in a laboratory environment), Dov Cohen and his colleagues had observers 
rate the emotional r eactions o f par ticipants who had just be en deli berately bumpe d and insulte d b y a 
confederate after they dropped off a completed questionnaire at the end of a hallway. The confederate was 
posing as someone who worked in the same building and who was frustrated by having to close a file drawer 
twice in or der to permi t the par ticipants to w alk past them ( first to dr op off the questionnair e at the end 
of the hall way and onc e again on their w ay back to the r oom where they believed the stud y they signed 
up for was taking plac e). The t wo observers were positioned at different ends o f the hall way so tha t they 
could read the participants’ body language and hear anything they might say. Interestingly, the researchers 
hypothesized that participants from the southern United States, which is one of several places in the world 
that has a “culture of honor,” would react with more aggression than participants from the northern United 
States, a prediction that was in fact supported by the observational data (Cohen, Nisbett, Bowdle, & Schwarz, 
1996)6. 
When the obser vations require a judgmen t on the par t of the obser vers—as in the studies b y Kraut and 
Johnston and Cohen and his c olleagues—a pr ocess r eferred to as  coding is t ypically r equired. Coding 
generally r equires cle arly defining a se t o f tar get beha viors. The obser vers then c ategorize par ticipants 
individually in terms of which behavior they have engaged in and the number of times they engaged in each 
behavior. The obser vers mig ht even record the dur ation of each behavior. The tar get behaviors must be 
defined in such a w ay that guides dif ferent observers to c ode them in the same w ay. This dif ficulty with 
coding illustrates the issue o f interrater reliability, as men tioned in Chapter 4. R esearchers are expected 
to demonstrate the interrater reliability of their coding procedure by having multiple raters code the same 
behaviors independently and then sho wing that the dif ferent observers are in close agr eement. Kraut and 
Johnston, f or e xample, vide o r ecorded a subse t o f their par ticipants’ r eactions and had t wo obser vers 
independently code them. The two observers showed that they agreed on the reactions that were exhibited 
97% of the time, indicating good interrater reliability. 
One o f the primar y benefi ts o f struc tured obser vation is tha t i t is far mor e ef ficient than na turalistic 
and par ticipant obser vation. S ince the r esearchers ar e f ocused on spe cific beha viors this r educes time 
and e xpense. Also, o ften times the en vironment is struc tured to enc ourage the beha viors o f in terest 
which again me ans tha t r esearchers do not ha ve to in vest as much time in w aiting f or the beha viors o f 
interest to na turally occur. Finally, researchers using this appr oach can clearly exert greater control over 
the environment. However, when r esearchers exert more control over the en vironment i t may make the 
environment less natural which decreases external validity. It is less cle ar for instance whether structured 
observations made in a labor atory environment will g eneralize to a r eal world environment. Furthermore, 
since researchers engaged in structured observation are often not disguised there may be more concerns 
with reactivity. 
Case Studies 
A case study is an in-depth e xamination of an individual. Some times case studies ar e also c ompleted on 
social units (e.g., a cult ) and e vents (e.g., a na tural disaster). Most commonly in psy chology, however, case 
Observational Research  |  173Reading in print? 
Scan this QR code 
to view the video 
on your mobile 
device. Or go to 
youtu.be/
KkaXNvzE4pk 
studies provide a detailed description and analysis of an individual. Often the individual has a rare or unusual 
condition or disorder or has damage to a specific region of the brain. 
Like many observational research methods, case studies tend to be mor e qualitative in nature. Case study 
methods involve an in-depth, and often a longitudinal examination of an individual. Depending on the focus 
of the c ase study, individuals ma y or ma y not be obser ved in their na tural setting. If the na tural setting 
is not wha t is o f in terest, then the individual ma y be br ought in to a ther apist’s o ffice or a r esearcher’s 
lab f or stud y. Also, the bulk o f the c ase stud y r eport will f ocus on in-depth descriptions o f the person 
rather than on statistical analyses. With that said some quantitative data may also be included in the write-
up of a c ase study. For instance, an individual’ s depression score may be c ompared to norma tive scores 
or their sc ore before and af ter treatment may be c ompared. As wi th other quali tative methods, a v ariety 
of dif ferent methods and tools c an be use d to c ollect inf ormation on the c ase. For instanc e, interviews, 
naturalistic observation, structured observation, psychological testing ( e.g., IQ test), and/or physiological 
measurements (e.g., brain scans) may be used to collect information on the individual. 
HM is one of the most notorious c ase studies in psychology. HM suffered from intractable and very severe 
epilepsy. A sur geon loc alized HM’ s epilepsy to his me dial tempor al lobe and in 1953 he r emoved lar ge 
sections o f his hippoc ampus in an a ttempt to stop the seizur es. The tr eatment w as a suc cess, in tha t 
it r esolved his epilepsy and his I Q and personali ty were unaf fected. However, the doc tors soon r ealized 
that HM e xhibited a str ange f orm o f amnesia, c alled an terograde amnesia. HM w as able to c arry out a 
conversation and he c ould remember short strings o f letters, dig its, and w ords. Basically, his shor t term 
memory w as pr eserved. H owever, HM c ould not c ommit ne w e vents to memor y. H e lost the abili ty to 
transfer information from his short-term memory to his long term memory, something memory researchers 
call consolidation. So while he c ould carry on a c onversation wi th someone, he w ould completely forget 
the c onversation af ter i t ende d. This w as an e xtremely impor tant c ase stud y f or memor y r esearchers 
because i t sugg ested tha t ther e’s a dissocia tion be tween shor t-term memor y and long-term memor y, i t 
suggested that these were two different abilities sub-served by different areas of the brain. It also suggested 
that the tempor al lobes ar e particularly important for consolidating new information (i.e., for transferring 
information from short-term memory to long-term memory). 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view 
them online here: https://kpu.pressbooks.pub/psychmethods4e/?p=78#oembed-1 
The history of psychology is filled with influential cases studies, such as Sigmund Freud’s 
description of “Anna O.” (see Note 6.1 “The Case of “Anna O.””) and John Watson and Rosalie 
Rayner’s description o f Little Al bert (Watson & Ra yner, 1920)7, who alleg edly learned to 
fear a white rat—along with other furry objects—when the researchers repeatedly made a 
loud noise every time the rat approached him. 
 
174  |  Observational ResearchThe Case of “Anna O.” 
Sigmund Freud used the case of a young woman he called “Anna O.” to illustrate many principles of his theory of 
psychoanalysis (Freud, 1961)8. (Her real name was Bertha Pappenheim, and she was an early feminist who went 
on to make important contributions to the field of social work.) Anna had come to Freud’s colleague Josef 
Breuer around 1880 with a variety of odd physical and psychological symptoms. One of them was that for 
several weeks she was unable to drink any fluids. According to Freud, 
She would take up the glass of water that she longed for, but as soon as it touched her lips she would push 
it away like someone suffering from hydrophobia.…She lived only on fruit, such as melons, etc., so as to 
lessen her tormenting thirst. (p. 9) 
But according to Freud, a breakthrough came one day while Anna was under hypnosis. 
[S]he grumbled about her English “lady-companion,” whom she did not care for, and went on to describe, 
with every sign of disgust, how she had once gone into this lady’s room and how her little dog—horrid 
creature!—had drunk out of a glass there. The patient had said nothing, as she had wanted to be polite. 
After giving further energetic expression to the anger she had held back, she asked for something to 
drink, drank a large quantity of water without any difficulty, and awoke from her hypnosis with the glass 
at her lips; and thereupon the disturbance vanished, never to return. (p.9) 
Freud’s interpretation was that Anna had repressed the memory of this incident along with the emotion that it 
triggered and that this was what had caused her inability to drink. Furthermore, he believed that her 
recollection of the incident, along with her expression of the emotion she had repressed, caused the symptom 
to go away. 
As an illustration of Freud’s theory, the case study of Anna O. is quite effective. As evidence for the theory, 
however, it is essentially worthless. The description provides no way of knowing whether Anna had really 
repressed the memory of the dog drinking from the glass, whether this repression had caused her inability to 
drink, or whether recalling this “trauma” relieved the symptom. It is also unclear from this case study how 
typical or atypical Anna’s experience was. 
 
Observational Research  |  175Figure 6.8 Anna O. “Anna O.” 
was the subject of a famous case 
study used by Freud to illustrate 
the principles of psychoanalysis. 
Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/File:Pappenheim_1882.jpg 
Case studies are useful because they provide a level of detailed analysis not found in many other research 
methods and greater insights may be gained from this more detailed analysis. As a result of the case study, 
the r esearcher ma y gain a sharpene d understanding o f wha t mig ht be come impor tant to look a t mor e 
extensively in futur e mor e c ontrolled r esearch. Case studies ar e also o ften the onl y w ay to stud y r are 
conditions because it may be impossible to find a lar ge enough sample of individuals with the condition to 
use quantitative methods. Although at first glance a case study of a rare individual might seem to tell us little 
about ourselves, they often do pr ovide insights into normal beha vior. The c ase of HM pr ovided important 
insights into the role of the hippocampus in memory consolidation. 
However, it is important to note that while case studies can provide insights into certain areas and variables 
to study, and can be useful in helping develop theories, they should never be used as evidence for theories. 
In other w ords, case studies c an be use d as inspir ation to f ormulate theories and h ypotheses, but those 
hypotheses and the ories then ne ed to be f ormally tested using mor e rigorous quantitative methods. The 
reason case studies shouldn’t be used to provide support for theories is that they suffer from problems with 
both internal and e xternal validity. Case studies lack the pr oper controls that true e xperiments contain. 
As such, the y suffer from problems with internal validity, so the y cannot be use d to de termine causation. 
For instance, during HM’s surgery, the surgeon may have accidentally lesioned another area of HM’s brain 
(a possi bility sugg ested b y the disse ction o f HM’ s br ain f ollowing his de ath) and tha t lesion ma y ha ve 
contributed to his inabili ty to c onsolidate new information. The fac t is, wi th case studies w e cannot rule 
176  |  Observational Researchout these sorts of alternative explanations. So, as with all observational methods, case studies do not permit 
determination of causation. In addition, because case studies are often of a sing le individual, and t ypically 
an abnormal individual, r esearchers c annot g eneralize their c onclusions to other individuals. R ecall tha t 
with most r esearch designs ther e is a tr ade-off between internal and e xternal validity. With case studies, 
however, there are problems with both internal validity and external validity. So there are limits both to the 
ability to determine causation and to g eneralize the results. A final limi tation of case studies is tha t ample 
opportunity exists for the theoretical biases of the researcher to color or bias the case description. Indeed, 
there have been accusations that the w oman who studie d HM destr oyed a lot o f her da ta that were not 
published and she has be en called into question f or destroying contradictory data that didn’t support her 
theory about how memories are consolidated. There is a fascinating New York Times article that describes 
some o f the c ontroversies tha t ensue d af ter HM’ s de ath and anal ysis o f his br ain tha t c an be f ound a t: 
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/07/magazine/the-brain-that-couldnt-remember.html?_r=0 
Archival Research 
Another approach that is often considered observational research involves analyzing archival data that have 
already been collected for some other purpose. An e xample is a stud y by Brett Pelham and his c olleagues 
on “implici t eg otism”—the tendenc y f or pe ople to pr efer pe ople, plac es, and things tha t ar e similar to 
themselves (Pelham, Carvallo, & Jones, 2005)9. In one study, they examined Social Security records to show 
that women with the names Virginia, Georgia, Louise, and Florence were especially likely to have moved to 
the states of Virginia, Georgia, Louisiana, and Florida, respectively. 
As wi th na turalistic obser vation, me asurement c an be mor e or less str aightforward when w orking wi th 
archival data. For example, counting the number of people named Virginia who live in various states based 
on Social Security records is relatively straightforward. But consider a study by Christopher Peterson and 
his colleagues on the r elationship between optimism and he alth using da ta that had be en collected many 
years before for a study on adult development (Peterson, Seligman, & Vaillant, 1988)10. In the 1940s, healthy 
male c ollege students had c ompleted an open-ende d questionnair e about dif ficult w artime e xperiences. 
In the la te 1980s, P eterson and his c olleagues r eviewed the men ’s questionnair e r esponses to obtain a 
measure o f e xplanatory st yle—their habi tual w ays o f e xplaining bad e vents tha t happen to them. M ore 
pessimistic pe ople tend to blame themsel ves and e xpect long-term nega tive c onsequences tha t af fect 
many aspects of their lives, while more optimistic people tend to blame outside f orces and expect limited 
negative c onsequences. T o obtain a me asure o f e xplanatory st yle f or e ach par ticipant, the r esearchers 
used a pr ocedure in which all nega tive events mentioned in the questionnair e responses, and an y causal 
explanations for them w ere identified and wri tten on inde x cards. These w ere given to a separ ate group 
of raters who rated each explanation in terms of three separate dimensions of optimism-pessimism. These 
ratings were then averaged to produce an explanatory style score for each participant. The researchers then 
assessed the sta tistical relationship between the men ’s explanatory st yle as under graduate students and 
archival measures of their he alth at approximately 60 y ears of age. The primar y result was that the mor e 
optimistic the men were as undergraduate students, the healthier they were as older men. P earson’s r was 
+.25. 
Observational Research  |  177This method is an e xample of content analysis—a family of systematic approaches to me asurement using 
complex archival data. Just as structured observation requires specifying the behaviors of interest and then 
noting them as they occur, content analysis requires specifying keywords, phrases, or ideas and then finding 
all occurrences of them in the data. These occurrences can then be counted, timed (e.g., the amount of time 
devoted to entertainment topics on the nightly news show), or analyzed in a variety of other ways. 
Media Attributions 
• What happens when you remove the hippocampus? – Sam Kean by TED-Ed licensed under a standard 
YouTube License 
• Pappenheim 1882 by unknown is in the Public Domain. 
Notes 
1. Festinger, L., Riecken, H., & Schachter, S. (1956). When prophecy fails: A social and psychological study of a modern 
group that predicted the destruction of the world. University of Minnesota Press. 
2. Rosenhan, D. L. (1973). On being sane in insane places. Science, 179, 250–258. 
3. Wilkins, A. (2008). “Happier than Non-Christians”: Collective emotions and symbolic boundaries among evangelical 
Christians. Social Psychology Quarterly, 71, 281–301. 
4. Levine, R. V., & Norenzayan, A. (1999). The pace of life in 31 countries. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 30, 178–205. 
5. Kraut, R. E., & Johnston, R. E. (1979). Social and emotional messages of smiling: An ethological approach. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 1539–1553. 
6. Cohen, D., Nisbett, R. E., Bowdle, B. F., & Schwarz, N. (1996). Insult, aggression, and the southern culture of honor: An 
"experimental ethnography." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70(5), 945-960. 
7. Watson, J. B., & Rayner, R. (1920). Conditioned emotional reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 3, 1–14. 
8. Freud, S. (1961). Five lectures on psycho-analysis. New York, NY: Norton. 
9. Pelham, B. W., Carvallo, M., & Jones, J. T. (2005). Implicit egotism. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 14, 
106–110. 
10. Peterson, C., Seligman, M. E. P., & Vaillant, G. E. (1988). Pessimistic explanatory style is a risk factor for physical illness: 
A thirty-five year longitudinal study. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55, 23–27. 
178  |  Observational Research33.  Key Takeaways and Exercises 
Key Takeaways 
• Non-experimental research is research that lacks the manipulation of an independent variable. 
• There are two broad types of non-experimental research. Correlational research that focuses on 
statistical relationships between variables that are measured but not manipulated; and observational 
research in which participants are observed and their behavior is recorded without the researcher 
interfering or manipulating any variables. 
• In general, experimental research is high in internal validity, correlational research is low in internal 
validity, and quasi-experimental research is in between. 
• Correlational research involves measuring two variables and assessing the relationship between them, 
with no manipulation of an independent variable. 
• Correlation does not imply causation. A statistical relationship between two variables, X and Y, does not 
necessarily mean that X causes Y. It is also possible that Y causes X, or that a third variable, Z, causes 
both X and Y. 
• While correlational research cannot be used to establish causal relationships between variables, 
correlational research does allow researchers to achieve many other important objectives (establishing 
reliability and validity, providing converging evidence, describing relationships, and making predictions) 
• Correlation coefficients can range from -1 to +1. The sign indicates the direction of the 
relationship between the variables and the numerical value indicates the strength of the relationship. 
• Researchers often use complex correlational research to explore relationships among several variables in 
the same study. 
• Complex correlational research can be used to explore possible causal relationships among variables 
using techniques such as partial correlation and multiple regression. Such designs can show patterns of 
relationships that are consistent with some causal interpretations and inconsistent with others, but they 
cannot unambiguously establish that one variable causes another. 
• Qualitative research is an important alternative to quantitative research in psychology. It generally 
involves asking broader research questions, collecting more detailed data (e.g., interviews), and using 
non-statistical analyses. 
• Many researchers conceptualize quantitative and qualitative research as complementary and advocate 
combining them. For example, qualitative research can be used to generate hypotheses and quantitative 
research to test them. 
• There are several different approaches to observational research including naturalistic observation, 
participant observation, structured observation, case studies, and archival research. 
• Naturalistic observation is used to observe people in their natural setting; participant observation 
involves becoming an active member of the group being observed; structured observation involves coding 
a small number of behaviors in a quantitative manner; case studies are typically used to collect in-depth 
information on a single individual; and archival research involves analyzing existing data. 
Key Takeaways and Exercises  |  179Exercises 
• Discussion: For each of the following studies, decide which type of research design it is and explain why. 
◦ A researcher conducts detailed interviews with unmarried teenage fathers to learn about how they 
feel and what they think about their role as fathers and summarizes their feelings in a written 
narrative. 
◦ A researcher measures the impulsivity of a large sample of drivers and looks at the statistical 
relationship between this variable and the number of traffic tickets the drivers have received. 
◦ A researcher randomly assigns patients with low back pain either to a treatment involving hypnosis 
or to a treatment involving exercise. She then measures their level of low back pain after 3 months. 
• Discussion: For each of the following, decide whether it is most likely that the study described is 
experimental or non-experimental and explain why. 
◦ A cognitive psychologist compares the ability of people to recall words that they were instructed to 
“read” with their ability to recall words that they were instructed to “imagine.” 
◦ A manager studies the correlation between new employees’ college grade point averages and their 
first-year performance reports. 
◦ An automotive engineer installs different stick shifts in a new car prototype, each time asking 
several people to rate how comfortable the stick shift feels. 
◦ A food scientist studies the relationship between the temperature inside people’s refrigerators and 
the amount of bacteria on their food. 
◦ A social psychologist tells some research participants that they need to hurry over to the next 
building to complete a study. She tells others that they can take their time. Then she observes 
whether they stop to help a research assistant who is pretending to be hurt. 
• Practice: For each of the following statistical relationships, decide whether the directionality problem is 
present and think of at least one plausible third variable. 
◦ People who eat more lobster tend to live longer. 
◦ People who exercise more tend to weigh less. 
◦ College students who drink more alcohol tend to have poorer grades. 
• Practice: Construct a correlation matrix for a hypothetical study including the variables of depression, 
anxiety, self-esteem, and happiness. Include the Pearson’s r values that you would expect. 
• Discussion: Imagine a correlational study that looks at intelligence, the need for cognition, and high 
school students’ performance in a critical thinking course. A multiple regression analysis shows that 
intelligence is not related to performance in the class but that the need for cognition is. Explain what this 
study has shown in terms of what is related to good performance in the critical thinking course. 
• Discussion: What are some ways in which a qualitative study of girls who play youth baseball would likely 
differ from a quantitative study on the same topic? How would the data differ by interviewing girls one-
on-one rather than conducting focus groups or surveys? 
• Practice: Find and read a published case study in psychology. (Use case study as a key term in a PsycINFO 
search.) Then do the following: 
◦ Describe one problem related to internal validity. 
180  |  Key Takeaways and Exercises◦ Describe one problem related to external validity. 
◦ Generate one hypothesis suggested by the case study that might be interesting to test in a 
subsequent study. 
Key Takeaways and Exercises  |  181