CHAPTER  IX 
FACTORIAL DESIGNS 
In Chapter 1 w e briefly described a stud y conducted by Simone Schnall and her c olleagues, in which the y 
found that washing one’s hands le ads people to vie w moral transgressions as less wr ong (Schnall, Benton, 
& Harvey, 2008)1. In a dif ferent but r elated study, Schnall and her c olleagues investigated whether feeling 
physically disgusted causes people to make harsher moral judgments (Schnall, Haidt, Clore, & Jordan, 2008)2. 
In this experiment, they manipulated participants’ feelings of disgust by testing them in either a clean room 
or a messy room that contained dirty dishes, an overflowing wastebasket, and a chewed-up pen. They also 
used a self -report questionnaire to me asure the amoun t of attention that people pay to their o wn bodily 
sensations. They called this “private body consciousness.” They measured their primary dependent variable, 
the harshness o f people’s moral judgments, by describing different behaviors (e.g., eating one’s dead dog, 
failing to return a found wallet) and having participants rate the moral acceptability of each one on a sc ale 
of 1 to 7. Finally, the researchers asked participants to rate their current level of disgust and other emotions. 
The primary results of this study were that participants in the messy room were, in fact, more disgusted and 
made harsher moral judgments than participants in the clean room—but only if they scored relatively high 
in private body consciousness. 
The research designs we have considered so far have been simple—focusing on a question about one variable 
or about a r elationship between two variables. But in man y ways, the c omplex design o f this e xperiment 
undertaken by Schnall and her c olleagues is mor e typical of research in psy chology. Fortunately, we have 
already covered the basic elemen ts of such designs in pr evious chapters. I n this chapter , we look closel y 
at ho w and wh y r esearchers use factorial designs , which ar e e xperiments tha t include mor e than one 
independent variable. 
Notes 
1. Schnall, S., Benton, J., & Harvey, S. (2008). With a clean conscience: Cleanliness reduces the severity of moral 
judgments. Psychological Science, 19(12), 1219-1222. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02227.x 
2. Schnall, S., Haidt, J., Clore, G. L., & Jordan, A. H. (2008). Disgust as embodied moral judgment. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 34, 1096–1109. 
Factorial Designs  |  22141.  Setting Up a Factorial Experiment 
Learning Objectives 
1. Explain why researchers often include multiple independent variables in their studies. 
2. Define factorial design, and use a factorial design table to represent and interpret simple factorial 
designs. 
 
Just as i t is c ommon for studies in psy chology to include multiple le vels of a sing le independent variable 
(placebo, new drug, old drug), it is also common for them to include multiple independent variables. Schnall 
and her c olleagues studied the ef fect of both disgust and priv ate body consciousness in the same stud y. 
Researchers’ inclusion o f multiple independen t v ariables in one e xperiment is fur ther illustr ated b y the 
following actual titles from various professional journals: 
• The Effects of Temporal Delay and Orientation on Haptic Object Recognition 
• Opening Closed Minds: The Combined Effects of Intergroup Contact and Need for Closure on 
Prejudice 
• Effects of Expectancies and Coping on Pain-Induced Intentions to Smoke 
• The Effect of Age and Divided Attention on Spontaneous Recognition 
• The Effects of Reduced Food Size and Package Size on the Consumption Behavior of Restrained and 
Unrestrained Eaters 
Just as including multiple le vels of a sing le independent variable allows one to answ er more sophisticated 
research questions, so too does including multiple independen t v ariables in the same e xperiment. F or 
example, inste ad o f c onducting one stud y on the ef fect o f disgust on mor al judgmen t and another on 
the effect of private body consciousness on mor al judgment, Schnall and c olleagues were able to c onduct 
one stud y tha t addr essed both questions. B ut including multiple independen t v ariables also allo ws the 
researcher to answ er questions about whe ther the ef fect o f one independen t v ariable depends on the 
level of another. This is r eferred to as an in teraction between the independen t variables. Schnall and her 
colleagues, for example, observed an interaction between disgust and private body consciousness because 
the effect of disgust depended on whether participants were high or low in private body consciousness. As 
we will see, interactions are often among the most interesting results in psychological research. 
Setting Up a Factorial Experiment  |  223Factorial Designs 
Overview 
By far the most c ommon appr oach to including multiple independen t v ariables ( which ar e o ften c alled 
factors) in an e xperiment is the fac torial design. I n a  factorial design, e ach le vel o f one independen t 
variable is combined with each level of the others to produce all possible combinations. Each combination, 
then, be comes a c ondition in the e xperiment. I magine, f or e xample, an e xperiment on the ef fect o f c ell 
phone use (y es vs. no ) and time o f da y ( day vs. nig ht) on driving abili ty. This is sho wn in 
the factorial design table in Figure 9.1. The c olumns o f the table r epresent c ell phone use, and the r ows 
represent time o f day. The f our cells of the table r epresent the f our possible combinations or c onditions: 
using a c ell phone during the da y, not using a c ell phone during the da y, using a c ell phone a t night, and 
not using a cell phone at night. This particular design is referred to as a 2 × 2 ( read “two-by-two”) factorial 
design because it combines two variables, each of which has two levels. 
If one of the independent variables had a third level (e.g., using a handheld cell phone, using a hands-free cell 
phone, and not using a cell phone), then it would be a 3 × 2 factorial design, and there would be six distinct 
conditions. Notice that the number o f possible conditions is the pr oduct of the numbers o f levels. A 2 × 2 
factorial design has four conditions, a 3 × 2 factorial design has six conditions, a 4 × 5 factorial design would 
have 20 c onditions, and so on. Also notic e that e ach number in the nota tion represents one fac tor, one 
independent variable. So by looking at how many numbers are in the notation, you can determine how many 
independent variables there are in the e xperiment. 2 x 2, 3 x 3, and 2 x 3 designs all ha ve two numbers in 
the notation and therefore all have two independent variables. The numerical value of each of the numbers 
represents the number of levels of each independent variable. A 2 means that the independent variable has 
two levels, a 3 me ans that the independen t variable has thr ee levels, a 4 me ans it has f our levels, etc. To 
illustrate a 3 x 3 design has t wo independent variables, each with three levels, while a 2 x 2 x 2 design has 
three independent variables, each with two levels. 
224  |  Setting Up a Factorial ExperimentFigure 9.1 Factorial Design Table Representing a 2 × 2 Factorial 
Design 
In principle, factorial designs can include any number of independent variables with any number of levels. 
For example, an experiment could include the type of psychotherapy (cognitive vs. behavioral), the length of 
the psychotherapy (2 weeks vs. 2 months), and the sex of the psychotherapist (female vs. male). This would 
be a 2 × 2 × 2 fac torial design and would have eight conditions. Figure 9.2 shows one way to represent this 
design. I n pr actice, i t is unusual f or ther e to be mor e than thr ee independen t variables wi th mor e than 
two or thr ee levels each. This is f or at least t wo reasons: For one, the number o f conditions can quickly 
become unmanageable. For example, adding a fourth independent variable with three levels (e.g., therapist 
experience: low vs. medium vs. hig h) to the curr ent example would make it a 2 × 2 × 2 × 3 fac torial design 
with 24 distinct conditions. Second, the number of participants required to populate all of these conditions 
(while maintaining a reasonable ability to detect a real underlying effect) can render the design unf easible 
(for more information, see the discussion about the importance of adequate statistical power in Chapter 13). 
As a result, in the r emainder of this section, we will focus on designs wi th two independent variables. The 
general principles discussed here extend in a straightforward way to more complex factorial designs. 
Setting Up a Factorial Experiment  |  225Figure 9.2 Factorial Design Table Representing a 2 × 2 × 2 Factorial 
Design 
Assigning Participants to Conditions 
Recall that in a simple between-subjects design, each participant is tested in only one condition. In a simple 
within-subjects design, e ach participant is teste d in all c onditions. In a fac torial experiment, the de cision 
to take the between-subjects or wi thin-subjects approach must be made separ ately for each independent 
variable. In a between-subjects factorial design, all of the independent variables are manipulated between 
subjects. For example, all par ticipants could be teste d either while using a c ell phone or while not using a 
cell phone and ei ther during the da y or during the nig ht. This would mean that each participant would be 
tested in one and onl y one condition. In a within-subjects factorial design, all of the independent variables 
are manipulated within subjects. All par ticipants could be teste d both while using a c ell phone and while 
not using a cell phone and both during the day and during the night. This would mean that each participant 
would need to be tested in all four conditions. The advantages and disadvantages of these two approaches 
are the same as those discusse d in Chapter 5. The between-subjects design is conceptually simpler, avoids 
order/carryover effects, and minimizes the time and effort of each participant. The within-subjects design 
is more efficient for the researcher and controls extraneous participant variables. 
Since fac torial designs ha ve mor e than one independen t v ariable, i t is also possi ble to manipula te one 
independent variable between subjects and another within subjects. This is called a mixed factorial design. 
For example, a r esearcher might choose to tr eat cell phone use as a wi thin-subjects factor by testing the 
same participants both while using a c ell phone and while not using a c ell phone (while counterbalancing 
226  |  Setting Up a Factorial Experimentthe order of these two conditions). But they might choose to treat time of day as a between-subjects factor 
by testing e ach participant either during the da y or during the nig ht (perhaps because this onl y requires 
them to come in for testing once). Thus each participant in this mixed design would be tested in two of the 
four conditions. 
Regardless of whether the design is be tween subjects, within subjects, or mix ed, the ac tual assignment of 
participants to conditions or orders of conditions is typically done randomly. 
Non-Manipulated Independent Variables 
In many factorial designs, one o f the independen t variables is a non-manipulated independent variable. 
The r esearcher me asures i t but does not manipula te i t. The stud y b y Schnall and c olleagues is a g ood 
example. One independent variable was disgust, which the researchers manipulated by testing participants 
in a cle an room or a messy r oom. The other w as private body consciousness, a par ticipant variable which 
the r esearchers simpl y me asured. Another e xample is a stud y b y H alle B rown and c olleagues in which 
participants were exposed to several words that they were later asked to recall (Brown, Kosslyn, Delamater, 
Fama, & Barsky , 1999)1. The manipula ted independent variable was the t ype of word. Some w ere negative 
health-related w ords ( e.g., tumor, coronary), and others w ere not he alth r elated ( e.g., election, geometry). 
The non-manipulated independent variable was whether participants were high or low in hypochondriasis 
(excessive concern with ordinary bodily symptoms). The result of this study was that the participants high 
in hypochondriasis were better than those low in hypochondriasis at recalling the health-related words, but 
they were no better at recalling the non-health-related words. 
Such studies ar e extremely common, and ther e are several points worth making about them. F irst, non-
manipulated independen t v ariables ar e usuall y par ticipant v ariables (priv ate bod y c onsciousness, 
hypochondriasis, self -esteem, g ender, and so on ), and as such, the y ar e b y defini tion be tween-subjects 
factors. F or e xample, pe ople ar e ei ther lo w in h ypochondriasis or hig h in h ypochondriasis; the y c annot 
be teste d in both o f these c onditions. Se cond, such studies ar e g enerally c onsidered to be e xperiments 
as long as a t le ast one independen t v ariable is manipula ted, r egardless o f ho w man y non-manipula ted 
independent variables are included. Third, it is important to remember that causal conclusions can only be 
drawn about the manipulated independent variable. For example, Schnall and her c olleagues were justified 
in c oncluding tha t disgust af fected the harshness o f their par ticipants’ mor al judgmen ts be cause the y 
manipulated that variable and randomly assigned participants to the cle an or messy r oom. But they would 
not have been justified in concluding that participants’ private body consciousness affected the harshness of 
their participants’ moral judgments because they did not manipulate that variable. It could be, for example, 
that having a stric t moral code and a heig htened awareness of one’s body are both c aused by some thir d 
variable (e.g., neuroticism). Thus i t is impor tant to be a ware of which variables in a stud y are manipulated 
and which are not. 
Setting Up a Factorial Experiment  |  227Non-Experimental Studies With Factorial Designs 
Thus far w e ha ve se en tha t fac torial e xperiments c an include manipula ted independen t v ariables or a 
combination o f manipula ted and non-manipula ted independen t v ariables. B ut fac torial designs c an also 
include only non-manipulated independent variables, in which case they are no longer experiments but are 
instead non-experimental in nature. Consider a h ypothetical study in which a r esearcher simply measures 
both the moods and the self -esteem of several participants—categorizing them as ha ving either a posi tive 
or nega tive mood and as being ei ther hig h or lo w in self -esteem—along wi th their willingness to ha ve 
unprotected sexual intercourse. This can be conceptualized as a 2 × 2 factorial design with mood (positive vs. 
negative) and self-esteem (high vs. low) as non-manipulated between-subjects factors. Willingness to have 
unprotected sex is the dependent variable. 
Again, because neither independent variable in this example was manipulated, it is a non-experimental study 
rather than an e xperiment. (The similar stud y b y Mac Donald and Mar tineau [ 2002]2 was an e xperiment 
because the y manipula ted their par ticipants’ moods.) This is impor tant be cause, as al ways, one must be 
cautious about inf erring causality from non-experimental studies be cause of the dir ectionality and thir d-
variable problems. For example, an ef fect of participants’ moods on their willingness to ha ve unprotected 
sex might be caused by any other variable that happens to be correlated with their moods. 
Notes 
1. Brown, H. D., Kosslyn, S. M., Delamater, B., Fama, A., & Barsky, A. J. (1999). Perceptual and memory biases for health-
related information in hypochondriacal individuals. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 47, 67–78. 
2. MacDonald, T. K., & Martineau, A. M. (2002). Self-esteem, mood, and intentions to use condoms: When does low self-
esteem lead to risky health behaviors? Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 299–306. 
228  |  Setting Up a Factorial Experiment42.  Interpreting the Results of a Factorial 
Experiment 
Learning Objectives 
1. Distinguish between main effects and interactions, and recognize and give examples of each. 
2. Sketch and interpret bar graphs and line graphs showing the results of studies with simple factorial 
designs. 
3. Distinguish between main effects and simple effects, and recognize when an analysis of simple effects is 
required. 
Graphing the Results of Factorial Experiments 
The results of factorial experiments with two independent variables can be gr aphed by representing one 
independent v ariable on the  x-axis and r epresenting the other b y using dif ferent c olored bars or lines. 
(The y-axis is al ways reserved f or the dependen t variable.) Figure 9.3 shows results f or t wo hypothetical 
factorial e xperiments. The top panel sho ws the r esults o f a 2 × 2 design. Time o f da y (day vs. nig ht) is 
represented by different locations on the x-axis, and cell phone use (no vs. yes) is represented by different-
colored bars. (I t w ould also be possi ble to r epresent c ell phone use on the  x-axis and time o f da y as 
different-colored bars. The choic e c omes do wn to which w ay se ems to c ommunicate the r esults most 
clearly.) The bot tom panel o f Figure 9.3 shows the r esults of a 4 × 2 design in which one o f the v ariables 
is quantitative. This variable, psychotherapy length, is r epresented along the x-axis, and the other v ariable 
(psychotherapy type) is r epresented by dif ferently formatted lines. This is a line gr aph rather than a bar 
graph because the variable on the x-axis is quantitative with a small number o f distinct levels. Line graphs 
are also appropriate when representing measurements made over a time in terval (also referred to as time 
series information) on the x-axis. 
Interpreting the Results of a Factorial Experiment  |  229Figure 9.3 Two Ways to Plot the Results of a Factorial Experiment With Two 
Independent Variables 
Main Effects 
In factorial designs, there are three kinds of results that are of interest: main effects, interaction effects, and 
simple effects. A main effect is the effect of one independent variable on the dependent variable—averaging 
across the le vels o f the other independen t v ariable. Thus ther e is one main ef fect to c onsider f or e ach 
independent variable in the study. The top panel of Figure 9.3 shows a main effect of cell phone use because 
driving performance was better, on average, when participants were not using cell phones than when the y 
were. The blue bars ar e, on a verage, hig her than the r ed bars. I t also sho ws a main ef fect of time o f day 
because driving performance was better during the day than during the night—both when participants were 
using cell phones and when the y were not. Main ef fects are independent of each other in the sense tha t 
whether or not there is a main effect of one independent variable says nothing about whether or not there 
is a main ef fect o f the other . The bot tom panel o f Figure 9 .3, f or e xample, sho ws a cle ar main ef fect o f 
psychotherapy length. The longer the psychotherapy, the better it worked. 
230  |  Interpreting the Results of a Factorial ExperimentInteractions 
There is an interaction effect (or just “interaction”) when the effect of one independent variable depends on 
the level of another. Although this might seem complicated, you already have an intuitive understanding of 
interactions. As an everyday example, assume your friend asks you to go to a movie with another friend. Your 
response to her is, “well it depends on which movie you are going to see and who else is coming.” You really 
want to see the big blockbuster summer hi t but have little interest in seeing the cheesy romantic comedy. 
In other words, there is a main effect of type of movie on your decision. If your decision to go to see either 
of these movies further depends on who she is bring ing with her then there is an interaction. For instance, 
if you will go to see the cheesy romantic comedy if she brings her hot friend you want to get to know better, 
but you will not g o to this mo vie if she brings an yone else, then ther e is an in teraction. Drug in teractions 
are another g ood illustration of everyday interactions. Many older men tak e Viagara to assist them in the 
bedroom, and many men take nitrates to treat angina or chest pain. So e ach of these drugs is beneficial on 
its own (there are main effects of each on older men’s well-being). But the combination of these two drugs 
can be lethal. In other words, there is a v ery important interaction between Viagara and heart medication 
that older men need to be aware of to prevent their untimely demise. 
Let’s no w c onsider some e xamples o f in teractions fr om r esearch. It pr obably w ould not surprise y ou to 
hear tha t the ef fect o f r eceiving psy chotherapy is str onger among pe ople who ar e hig hly motiv ated to 
change than among pe ople who ar e not motiv ated to chang e. This is an in teraction because the ef fect of 
one independen t v ariable (whether or not one r eceives psy chotherapy) depends on the le vel o f another 
(motivation to chang e). Schnall and her c olleagues also demonstr ated an in teraction be cause the ef fect 
of whe ther the r oom w as cle an or messy on par ticipants’ mor al judgmen ts depende d on whe ther the 
participants w ere lo w or hig h in priv ate bod y c onsciousness. I f the y w ere hig h in priv ate bod y 
consciousness, then those in the messy r oom made harsher judgmen ts. If they were low in priv ate body 
consciousness, then whether the room was clean or messy did not matter. 
In man y studies, the primar y r esearch question is about an in teraction. The stud y b y B rown and her 
colleagues was inspired by the idea that people with hypochondriasis are especially attentive to any negative 
health-related inf ormation. This le d to the h ypothesis tha t pe ople hig h in h ypochondriasis w ould r ecall 
negative health-related words more accurately than people low in hypochondriasis but recall non-health-
related words about the same as people low in hypochondriasis. And of course, this is exactly what happened 
in this study. 
Types of Interactions 
The effect of one independent variable can depend on the level of the other in several different ways. First, 
there can be spreading interactions. Examples of spreading interactions are shown in the top t wo panels 
of Figure 9.4. In the top panel, independen t variable “B” has an ef fect at level 1 of independent variable “A” 
(there is a dif ference in the heig ht of the blue and r ed bars on the lef t side o f the gr aph) but no ef fect at 
level 2 of independent variable “A.” (there is no difference in the height of the blue and red bars on the right 
Interpreting the Results of a Factorial Experiment  |  231side of the gr aph). This is much lik e the stud y of Schnall and her c olleagues where there was an ef fect of 
disgust for those high in private body consciousness but not for those low in private body consciousness. In 
the middle panel, independen t variable “B” has a str onger effect at level 1 of independent variable “A” than 
at level 2 (there is a larger difference in the height of the blue and red bars on the left side of the graph and 
a smaller dif ference in the heig ht of the blue and r ed bars on the rig ht side o f the gr aph). This is lik e the 
hypothetical driving e xample where there was a str ong effect of using a c ell phone a t night and a w eaker 
effect of using a cell phone during the day. So to summarize, for spreading interactions there is an effect of 
one independent variable at one level of the other independent variable and there is either a weak effect or 
no effect of that independent variable at the other level of the other independent variable. 
The second type of interaction that can be f ound is a cross-over interaction. A cross-over interaction is 
depicted in the bot tom panel o f F igure 9 .4, independen t v ariable “B” again has an ef fect a t both le vels 
of independen t v ariable “A,” but the ef fects ar e in opposi te dir ections. Another e xample o f a cr ossover 
interaction c omes fr om a stud y b y Ka thy Gilliland on the ef fect o f c affeine on the v erbal test sc ores o f 
introverts and e xtraverts (Gilliland, 1980)1. Introverts perform better than e xtraverts when the y have not 
ingested an y c affeine. B ut e xtraverts perf orm be tter than in troverts when the y ha ve ing ested 4 mg o f 
caffeine per kilogram of body weight. 
232  |  Interpreting the Results of a Factorial ExperimentFigure 9.4 Bar Graphs Showing Three Types of Interactions. In the top panel, 
one independent variable has an effect at one level of the second independent 
variable but not at the other. In the middle panel, one independent variable 
has a stronger effect at one level of the second independent variable than at 
the other. In the bottom panel, one independent variable has the opposite 
effect at one level of the second independent variable than at the other. 
Figure 9.5 shows examples of these same kinds o f interactions when one o f the independen t variables is 
Interpreting the Results of a Factorial Experiment  |  233quantitative and the r esults are plotted in a line gr aph. Note that the top t wo figures depict the two kinds 
of spreading interactions that can be found while the bottom figure depicts a crossover interaction (the two 
lines literally “cross over” each other). 
234  |  Interpreting the Results of a Factorial ExperimentFigure 9.5 Line Graphs Showing Different Types of Interactions. In the top 
panel, one independent variable has an effect at one level of the second 
independent variable but not at the other. In the middle panel, one 
independent variable has a stronger effect at one level of the second 
independent variable than at the other. In the bottom panel, one 
independent variable has the opposite effect at one level of the second 
Interpreting the Results of a Factorial Experiment  |  235independent variable than at the other. [Image description] 
 
Simple Effects 
When researchers find an in teraction it suggests that the main ef fects may be a bi t misleading. Think o f 
the example of a cr ossover interaction where introverts were found to perf orm better on a test o f verbal 
test performance than e xtraverts when the y had not ing ested any caffeine, but e xtraverts were found to 
perform better than in troverts when the y had ing ested 4 mg o f caffeine per kilogr am of body weight. To 
examine the main effect of caffeine consumption, the researchers would have averaged across introversion 
and extraversion and simpl y looked at whether overall those who ing ested caffeine had be tter or w orse 
verbal memor y test perf ormance. Be cause the posi tive ef fect o f c affeine on e xtraverts w ould be wipe d 
out b y the nega tive ef fects o f c affeine on the in troverts, no main ef fect o f c affeine c onsumption w ould 
have been found. Similarly, to examine the main effect of personality, the researchers would have averaged 
across the levels of the caffeine variable to look a t the effects of personality (introversion vs. extraversion) 
independent of caffeine. In this c ase, the posi tive effects extraversion in the c affeine condition would be 
wiped out by the negative effects of extraversion in the no caffeine condition. Does the absence of any main 
effects mean that there is no effect of caffeine and no effect of personality? No of course not. The presence 
of the in teraction indicates that the stor y is mor e complicated, that the ef fects of caffeine on v erbal test 
performance depend on personali ty. This is wher e simple effects come into play. Simple effects are a way 
of breaking down the interaction to figure out precisely what is going on. An interaction simply informs us 
that the ef fects of at least one independen t variable depend on the le vel of another independen t variable. 
Whenever an interaction is detected, researchers need to conduct additional analyses to determine where 
that interaction is c oming from. Of c ourse one ma y be able to visualiz e and in terpret the in teraction on 
a gr aph but a simple ef fects anal ysis pr ovides r esearchers wi th a mor e sophistic ated me ans o f br eaking 
down the in teraction. Specifically, a simple ef fects analysis allows researchers to de termine the ef fects of 
each independent variable at each level of the other independen t variable. So while the r esearchers would 
average across the t wo levels of the personali ty variable to e xamine the ef fects of caffeine on v erbal test 
performance in a main ef fects anal ysis, f or a simple ef fects anal ysis the r esearchers w ould e xamine the 
effects of caffeine in introverts and then examine the effects of caffeine in extraverts. As we saw previously, 
the researchers also examined the effects of personality in the no caffeine condition and found that in this 
condition introverts performed better than e xtraverts. Finally, they examined the ef fects of personality in 
the caffeine condition and found that extraverts performed better than introverts in this condition. For a 2 
x 2 design like this, there will be two main effects the researchers can explore and four simple effects. 
Schnall and c olleagues found a main ef fect of disgust on mor al judgments (those in a messy r oom made 
harsher mor al judgmen ts). H owever, the y also disc overed an in teraction be tween priv ate bod y 
consciousness and disgust. I n other words, the effect of disgust depended on private body consciousness. 
The presence of this interaction suggests the main effect may be a bi t misleading. That is, it is not entirely 
236  |  Interpreting the Results of a Factorial Experimentaccurate to say that those in a messy r oom made harsher mor al judgments because this was only true for 
half of the participants. Using simple effects analyses, they were able to further demonstrate that for people 
high in private body consciousness, there was an effect of disgust on moral judgments. Further, they found 
that for those lo w in priv ate body consciousness there was no ef fect of disgust on mor al judgments. By 
examining the ef fect of disgust a t each level of body consciousness using simple ef fects analyses, Schnall 
and colleagues were able to better understand the nature of the interaction. 
As described previously, Brown and colleagues found an interaction between type of words (health related 
or not health related) and hypochondriasis (high or low) on word recall. To break down this interaction using 
simple effects analyses they examined the effect of hypochondriasis at each level of word type. Specifically, 
they examined the effect of hypochondriasis on recall of health-related words and then they subsequently 
examined the effect of hypochondriasis on recall of non-health related words. They found that people high 
in hypochondriasis were able to r ecall more health-related words than pe ople low in h ypochondriasis. In 
contrast, there was no effect of hypochondriasis on the recall of non-health related words. 
Once again examining simple effects provides a means of breaking down the interaction and therefore it is 
only necessary to conduct these analyses when an interaction is present. When there is no interaction then 
the main effects will tell the c omplete and accurate story. To summarize, rather than averaging across the 
levels of the other independen t variable, as is done in a main ef fects analysis, simple ef fects analyses are 
used to examine the effects of each independent variable at each level of the other independent variable(s). 
So a researcher using a 2×2 design wi th four conditions would need to look a t 2 main ef fects and 4 simple 
effects. A researcher using a 2×3 design with six conditions would need to look at 2 main effects and 5 simple 
effects, while a r esearcher using a 3×3 design wi th nine c onditions would need to look a t 2 main ef fects 
and 6 simple ef fects. As y ou can see, while the number o f main ef fects depends simpl y on the number o f 
independent variables included (one main effect can be explored for each independent variable), the number 
of simple effects analyses depends on the number of levels of the independent variables (because a separate 
analysis of each independent variable  is conducted at each level of the other independent variable). 
Image Descriptions 
Figure 9.5 image description: Three panels, e ach showing a dif ferent line graph pattern. In the top panel, 
one line r emains constant while the other g oes up. I n the middle panel, both lines g o up but a t different 
rates. In the bottom panel, one line goes down and the other goes up so they cross. [Return to Figure 9.5] 
Notes 
1. Gilliland, K. (1980). The interactive effect of introversion-extraversion with caffeine induced arousal on verbal 
performance. Journal of Research in Personality, 14, 482–492. 
Interpreting the Results of a Factorial Experiment  |  237