CHAPTER  IV 
PSYCHOLOGICAL MEASUREMENT 
Researchers T ara Mac Donald and Alanna Mar tineau w ere in terested in the ef fect o f f emale univ ersity 
students’ moods on their in tentions to ha ve unpr otected se xual in tercourse (Mac Donald & Mar tineau, 
2002)1. In a carefully designed empirical study, they found that being in a negative mood increased intentions 
to ha ve unpr otected se x—but onl y f or studen ts who w ere lo w in self -esteem. Althoug h ther e ar e man y 
challenges in volved in c onducting a stud y lik e this, one o f the primar y ones is the me asurement o f the 
relevant variables. In this study, the researchers needed to know whether each of their participants had high 
or low self-esteem, which of course required measuring their self-esteem. They also needed to be sure that 
their attempt to put people into a negative mood (by having them think negative thoughts) was successful, 
which required measuring their moods. F inally, they needed to se e whether self-esteem and mood w ere 
related to participants’ intentions to have unprotected sexual intercourse, which required measuring these 
intentions. 
To students who are just getting started in psychological research, the challenge of measuring such variables 
might seem insurmountable. Is it really possible to measure things as intangible as self-esteem, mood, or an 
intention to do something? The answer is a resounding yes, and in this chapter we look closely at the nature 
of the v ariables that psychologists study and ho w they can be me asured. We also look a t some pr actical 
issues in psychological measurement. 
 
Do You Feel You Are a Person of Worth? 
The Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (Rosenberg, 1989)2 is one of the most common measures of self-esteem and 
the one that MacDonald and Martineau used in their study. Participants respond to each of the 10 items that 
follow with a rating on a 4-point scale: Strongly Agree, Agree, Disagree, Strongly Disagree. Score Items 1, 2, 4, 6, 
and 7 by assigning 3 points for each Strongly Agree response, 2 for each Agree, 1 for each Disagree, and 0 for 
each Strongly Disagree. Reverse the scoring for Items 3, 5, 8, 9, and 10 by assigning 0 points for each Strongly 
Agree, 1 point for each Agree, and so on. The overall score is the total number of points. 
1. I feel that I’m a person of worth, at least on an equal plane with others. 
2. I feel that I have a number of good qualities. 
3. All in all, I am inclined to feel that I am a failure. 
4. I am able to do things as well as most other people. 
5. I feel I do not have much to be proud of. 
6. I take a positive attitude toward myself. 
7. On the whole, I am satisfied with myself. 
8. I wish I could have more respect for myself. 
Psychological Measurement  |  819. I certainly feel useless at times. 
10. At times I think I am no good at all. 
Notes 
1. MacDonald, T. K., & Martineau, A. M. (2002). Self-esteem, mood, and intentions to use condoms: When does low self-
esteem lead to risky health behaviors? Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 299–306. 
2. Rosenberg, M. (1989). Society and the adolescent self-image (rev. ed.). Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press. 
82  |  Psychological Measurement19.  Understanding Psychological Measurement 
Learning Objectives 
1. Define measurement and give several examples of measurement in psychology. 
2. Explain what a psychological construct is and give several examples. 
3. Distinguish conceptual from operational definitions, give examples of each, and create simple operational 
definitions. 
4. Distinguish the four levels of measurement, give examples of each, and explain why this distinction is 
important. 
What Is Measurement? 
Measurement is the assignmen t of scores to individuals so tha t the sc ores represent some char acteristic 
of the individuals. This v ery general definition is c onsistent with the kinds o f measurement that everyone 
is familiar with—for example, weighing oneself by stepping onto a bathroom scale, or checking the internal 
temperature of a roasting turkey using a me at thermometer. It is also c onsistent with measurement in the 
other scienc es. I n ph ysics, f or e xample, one mig ht me asure the poten tial ener gy o f an obje ct in Ear th’s 
gravitational field b y finding i ts mass and heig ht (which of course requires measuring those variables) and 
then multiplying them together along with the gravitational acceleration of Earth (9.8 m/s2). The result of 
this procedure is a score that represents the object’s potential energy. 
This general definition of measurement is consistent with measurement in psychology too. (Psychological 
measurement is o ften referred to as psychometrics.) Imagine, for example, that a c ognitive psychologist 
wants to measure a person’s working memory capacity—their ability to hold in mind and think about several 
pieces of information all at the same time. To do this, she might use a backward digit span task, in which she 
reads a list of two digits to the person and asks them to repeat them in reverse order. She then repeats this 
several times, increasing the length of the list by one digit each time, until the person makes an error. The 
length of the longest list for which the person responds correctly is the score and represents their working 
memory capacity. Or imag ine a clinic al psychologist who is in terested in ho w depressed a person is. H e 
administers the Beck Depression Inventory, which is a 21-item self-report questionnaire in which the person 
rates the e xtent to which the y have felt sad, lost ener gy, and e xperienced other symptoms o f depression 
over the past 2 weeks. The sum of these 21 ratings is the score and represents the person’s current level of 
depression. 
The important point here is that measurement does not require any particular instruments or procedures. 
Understanding Psychological Measurement  |  83What it does require is some systematic procedure for assigning scores to individuals or objects so that those 
scores represent the characteristic of interest. 
Psychological Constructs 
Many v ariables studie d b y psy chologists ar e str aightforward and simple to me asure. These include ag e, 
height, w eight, and bir th or der. You c an ask pe ople ho w old the y ar e and be r easonably sur e tha t the y 
know and will tell you. Although people might not know or want to tell you how much they weigh, you can 
have them step onto a bathroom scale. Other variables studied by psychologists—perhaps the majority—are 
not so str aightforward or simple to me asure. We c annot ac curately assess pe ople’s le vel o f in telligence 
by looking a t them, and w e c ertainly c annot put their self -esteem on a ba throom sc ale. These kinds o f 
variables are called constructs (pronounced CON-structs) and include personality traits (e.g., extraversion), 
emotional states (e.g., fear), attitudes (e.g., toward taxes), and abilities (e.g., athleticism). 
Psychological constructs cannot be observed directly. One reason is that they often represent tendencies to 
think, f eel, or ac t in c ertain w ays. F or e xample, to sa y tha t a par ticular univ ersity studen t is hig hly 
extraverted does not ne cessarily mean that she is beha ving in an e xtraverted way rig ht now. In fact, she 
might be si tting quietly by herself, r eading a book. I nstead, i t means that she has a g eneral tendency to 
behave in extraverted ways (e.g., being outgoing, enjoying social interactions) across a variety of situations. 
Another r eason psy chological c onstructs c annot be obser ved dir ectly is tha t the y o ften in volve in ternal 
processes. F ear, f or e xample, in volves the ac tivation o f c ertain c entral and peripher al ner vous system 
structures, along wi th c ertain kinds o f thoug hts, f eelings, and beha viors—none o f which is ne cessarily 
obvious to an outside obser ver. Notice also tha t neither extraversion nor f ear “reduces to” any particular 
thought, feeling, act, or physiological structure or process. Instead, each is a kind of summary of a complex 
set of behaviors and internal processes. 
 
The Big Five 
The Big Five is a set of five broad dimensions that capture much of the variation in human personality. Each of 
the Big Five can even be defined in terms of six more specific constructs called “facets” (Costa & McCrae, 1992)1. 
84  |  Understanding Psychological MeasurementOpenness to 
experience Fantasy Aesthetics Feelings Actions Ideas Values 
Conscientiousness 
Extroversion 
Agreeableness 
Neuroticism Table 4.1 The Big Five Personality Dimensions 
Openness to 
experience Fantasy Aesthetics Feelings Actions Ideas Values 
Conscientiousness Competence Order Dutifulness Achievement/
Striving Self-discipline Deliberation 
Extroversion Warmth Gregariousness Assertiveness Activity Excitement 
seeking 
Positive 
emotions 
Agreeableness Trust Straight-forwardness Altruism Compliance Modesty Tender 
mindedness 
Neuroticism Worry Anger Discouragement Self-consciousness Impulsivity Vulnerability 
 
The conceptual definition of a psychological construct describes the behaviors and internal processes that 
make up tha t construct, along wi th how it relates to other v ariables. For example, a c onceptual definition 
of neuroticism (another one o f the B ig Five) would be tha t it is pe ople’s tendency to e xperience negative 
emotions such as anxiety, anger, and sadness across a variety of situations. This definition might also include 
that it has a strong genetic component, remains fairly stable over time, and is positively correlated with the 
tendency to experience pain and other physical symptoms. 
Students some times wonder wh y, when r esearchers want to understand a c onstruct lik e self-esteem or 
neuroticism, they do not simply look it up in the dictionary. One reason is that many scientific constructs do 
not have counterparts in everyday language (e.g., working memory capacity). More important, researchers 
are in the business o f developing definitions that are more detailed and precise—and that more accurately 
describe the way the world is—than the inf ormal definitions in the dic tionary. As we will se e, they do this 
by proposing conceptual definitions, testing them empiric ally, and revising them as ne cessary. Sometimes 
they thr ow them out altog ether. This is wh y the r esearch li terature o ften includes dif ferent c onceptual 
definitions of the same c onstruct. In some c ases, an older c onceptual defini tion has be en replaced by a 
newer one tha t fi ts and w orks better. In others, r esearchers are still in the pr ocess of deciding which o f 
various conceptual definitions is the best. 
86  |  Understanding Psychological MeasurementOperational Definitions 
An operational definition is a defini tion o f a v ariable in terms o f pr ecisely ho w i t is to be me asured. 
These measures generally fall into one of three broad categories. Self-report measures are those in which 
participants report on their o wn thoughts, feelings, and ac tions, as wi th the R osenberg Self-Esteem Scale 
(Rosenberg, 1965) 2. Behavioral measur es are those in which some other aspe ct o f par ticipants’ beha vior 
is obser ved and r ecorded. This is an e xtremely broad c ategory that includes the obser vation of people’s 
behavior both in hig hly structured laboratory tasks and in mor e natural settings. A g ood example of the 
former would be measuring working memory capacity using the backward digit span task. A good example 
of the latter is a famous oper ational definition of physical aggression from researcher Albert Bandura and 
his colleagues (Bandura, Ross, & Ross, 1961)3. They let each of several children play for 20 minutes in a room 
that contained a clo wn-shaped punching bag c alled a Bobo doll. The y filmed each child and c ounted the 
number of acts of physical aggression the child c ommitted. These include d hitting the doll wi th a malle t, 
punching it, and kicking i t. Their operational definition, then, was the number of these specifically defined 
acts that the child c ommitted during the 20-minute period. F inally, physiological measures are those that 
involve recording any of a wide variety of physiological processes, including heart rate and blood pressure, 
galvanic skin response, hormone levels, and electrical activity and blood flow in the brain. 
For any given variable or construct, there will be multiple operational definitions. Stress is a good example. 
A rough conceptual definition is tha t stress is an adaptiv e response to a per ceived danger or thr eat that 
involves physiological, cognitive, affective, and behavioral components. But researchers have operationally 
defined i t in se veral w ays. The Social R eadjustment Ra ting Sc ale (Holmes & Rahe, 196 7)4 is a self -report 
questionnaire on which pe ople identify stressful events that they have experienced in the past y ear and 
assigns points for each one depending on its severity. For example, a man who has been divorced (73 points), 
changed jobs (36 points), and had a change in sleeping habits (16 points) in the past year would have a total 
score of 125. The H assles and Uplif ts Scale (Delong is, Coyne, Dakof, Folkman & L azarus, 1982) 5 is similar 
but f ocuses on e veryday str essors lik e misplacing things and being c oncerned about one ’s w eight. The 
Perceived Stress Scale (Cohen, Kamarck, & Mermelstein, 1983) 6 is another self-report measure that focuses 
on people’s feelings of stress (e.g., “How often have you felt nervous and stressed?”). Researchers have also 
operationally defined stress in terms o f several physiological variables including blood pr essure and levels 
of the stress hormone cortisol. 
When psychologists use multiple oper ational defini tions of the same c onstruct—either wi thin a stud y or 
across studies—they are using converging operations. The ide a is tha t the v arious operational definitions 
are “ converging” or c oming tog ether on the same c onstruct. W hen sc ores base d on se veral dif ferent 
operational defini tions ar e closel y r elated to e ach other and pr oduce similar pa tterns o f r esults, this 
constitutes good evidence that the construct is being measured effectively and that it is useful. The various 
measures of stress, for example, are all correlated with each other and have all been shown to be correlated 
with other variables such as immune system functioning (also measured in a variety of ways) (Segerstrom & 
Miller, 2004)7. This is what allows researchers eventually to draw useful general conclusions, such as “stress 
is negatively correlated with immune system functioning,” as opposed to more specific and less useful ones, 
such as “ people’s sc ores on the P erceived S tress Sc ale ar e nega tively c orrelated wi th their whi te blood 
counts.” 
Understanding Psychological Measurement  |  87Levels of Measurement 
The psy chologist S. S. S tevens sugg ested tha t sc ores c an be assigne d to individuals in a w ay tha t 
communicates mor e or less quan titative inf ormation about the v ariable o f in terest ( Stevens, 1946 )8. F or 
example, the o fficials at a 100-m r ace could simply rank order the runners as the y crossed the finish line 
(first, se cond, e tc.), or the y c ould time e ach runner to the ne arest ten th o f a se cond using a stop watch 
(11.5 s, 12.1 s, e tc.). In either case, they would be me asuring the runners’ times b y systematically assigning 
scores to r epresent those times. B ut while the r ank ordering procedure communicates the fac t that the 
second-place runner took long er to finish than the first-plac e finisher , the stop watch pr ocedure also 
communicates how much longer the se cond-place finisher took. S tevens actually suggested four different 
levels of measurement (which he c alled “ scales o f me asurement”) tha t c orrespond to f our t ypes o f 
information that can be c ommunicated by a se t of scores, and the sta tistical procedures that can be use d 
with the information. 
The nominal level of measurement is use d for categorical variables and in volves assigning sc ores that are 
category labels. Ca tegory labels c ommunicate whe ther an y t wo individuals ar e the same or dif ferent in 
terms of the variable being measured. For example, if you ask your participants about their mari tal status, 
you ar e engag ed in nominal-le vel me asurement. Or if y ou ask y our par ticipants to indic ate which o f 
several e thnicities the y iden tify themsel ves wi th, y ou ar e again engag ed in nominal-le vel me asurement. 
The essential point about nominal sc ales is that they do not impl y any ordering among the r esponses. For 
example, when classif ying pe ople ac cording to their fa vorite c olor, ther e is no sense in which gr een is 
placed “ahead of” blue. Responses are merely categorized. Nominal scales thus embody the lowest level of 
measurement9. 
The r emaining thr ee le vels o f me asurement ar e use d f or quan titative v ariables. The  ordinal level of 
measurement in volves assigning sc ores so tha t the y r epresent the r ank or der o f the individuals. Ranks 
communicate not only whether any two individuals are the same or different in terms of the variable being 
measured but also whe ther one individual is hig her or lo wer on tha t variable. For example, a r esearcher 
wishing to me asure consumers’ satisfaction wi th their micr owave ovens mig ht ask them to spe cify their 
feelings as ei ther “very dissatisfied,” “somewhat dissatisfied,” “somewhat satisfied,” or “v ery satisfied.” The 
items in this sc ale ar e or dered, r anging fr om le ast to most sa tisfied. This is wha t distinguishes or dinal 
from nominal sc ales. Unlike nominal sc ales, ordinal scales allow comparisons of the degr ee to which t wo 
individuals r ate the v ariable. F or e xample, our sa tisfaction or dering mak es i t me aningful to asser t tha t 
one person is mor e satisfied than another wi th their microwave ovens. Such an assertion reflects the first 
person’s use of a verbal label that comes later in the list than the label chosen by the second person. 
On the other hand, or dinal scales fail to c apture important information that will be pr esent in the other 
levels o f me asurement w e e xamine. I n par ticular, the dif ference be tween t wo le vels o f an or dinal sc ale 
cannot be assumed to be the same as the dif ference between two other levels (just like you cannot assume 
that the gap be tween the runners in first and se cond plac e is e qual to the gap be tween the runners in 
second and third place). In our satisfaction scale, for example, the difference between the responses “very 
dissatisfied” and “ somewhat dissatisfied” is pr obably not e quivalent to the dif ference between “somewhat 
dissatisfied” and “ somewhat sa tisfied.” N othing in our me asurement pr ocedure allo ws us to de termine 
88  |  Understanding Psychological Measurementwhether the two differences reflect the same dif ference in psychological satisfaction. Statisticians express 
this point by saying that the dif ferences between adjacent scale values do not ne cessarily represent equal 
intervals on the under lying scale giving rise to the me asurements. (In our case, the underlying scale is the 
true feeling of satisfaction, which we are trying to measure.) 
The interval level of measurement involves assigning scores using numerical scales in which intervals have 
the same interpretation throughout. As an example, consider either the Fahrenheit or Celsius temperature 
scales. The difference between 30 degrees and 40 degr ees represents the same temper ature difference as 
the difference between 80 degr ees and 90 degr ees. This is be cause each 10-degree interval has the same 
physical meaning (in terms of the kinetic energy of molecules). 
Interval sc ales are not perf ect, however. In par ticular, they do not ha ve a true z ero point even if one o f 
the scaled values happens to carry the name “zero.” The Fahrenheit scale illustrates the issue. Zero degrees 
Fahrenheit does not represent the complete absence of temperature (the absence of any molecular kinetic 
energy). In reality, the label “zero” is applied to its temperature for quite accidental reasons connected to the 
history of temperature measurement. Since an interval scale has no true zero point, it does not make sense 
to compute ratios of temperatures. For example, there is no sense in which the r atio of 40 to 20 degr ees 
Fahrenheit is the same as the ratio of 100 to 50 degrees; no interesting physical property is preserved across 
the two ratios. After all, if the “zero” label were applied at the temperature that Fahrenheit happens to label 
as 10 degrees, the two ratios would instead be 30 to 10 and 90 to 40 , no longer the same! For this reason, it 
does not make sense to say that 80 degrees is “twice as hot” as 40 degr ees. Such a claim would depend on 
an arbitrary decision about where to “start” the temperature scale, namely, what temperature to c all zero 
(whereas the claim is intended to make a more fundamental assertion about the underlying physical reality). 
In psychology, the intelligence quotient (IQ) is often considered to be measured at the interval level. While 
it is technically possible to receive a score of 0 on an IQ test, such a score would not indicate the complete 
absence of IQ. Moreover, a person wi th an I Q score of 140 does not ha ve twice the I Q of a person wi th a 
score of 70. However, the difference between IQ scores of 80 and 100 is the same as the difference between 
IQ scores of 120 and 140. 
Finally, the ratio level of measurement involves assigning scores in such a way that there is a true zero point 
that represents the complete absence of the quantity. Height measured in meters and weight measured in 
kilograms are good examples. So ar e counts of discrete objects or e vents such as the number o f siblings 
one has or the number o f questions a student answers correctly on an exam. You can think of a ratio scale 
as the thr ee earlier scales rolled up in one. Lik e a nominal sc ale, it provides a name or c ategory for each 
object (the numbers serve as labels). Like an ordinal scale, the objects are ordered (in terms of the ordering 
of the numbers). Like an interval scale, the same difference at two places on the scale has the same meaning. 
However, in addition, the same ratio at two places on the scale also carries the same meaning (see Table 4.1). 
The Fahrenheit scale for temperature has an arbitrary zero point and is therefore not a ratio scale. However, 
zero on the K elvin sc ale is absolute z ero. This mak es the K elvin sc ale a r atio sc ale. F or e xample, if one 
temperature is twice as high as another as measured on the Kelvin scale, then it has twice the kinetic energy 
of the other temperature. 
Another example of a r atio scale is the amoun t of money you have in y our pocket right now (25 c ents, 50 
Understanding Psychological Measurement  |  89cents, etc.). Money is measured on a ratio scale because, in addition to having the properties of an interval 
scale, it has a true z ero point: if y ou have zero money, this ac tually implies the absenc e of money. Since 
money has a true zero point, it makes sense to say that someone with 50 cents has twice as much money as 
someone with 25 cents. 
Stevens’s levels of measurement are important for at least two reasons. First, they emphasize the generality 
of the c oncept o f me asurement. Althoug h pe ople do not normall y think o f c ategorizing or r anking 
individuals as me asurement, in fac t, the y ar e as long as the y ar e done so tha t the y r epresent some 
characteristic o f the individuals. Se cond, the le vels o f me asurement c an ser ve as a r ough guide to the 
statistical procedures that can be used with the data and the conclusions that can be drawn from them. With 
nominal-level measurement, for example, the only available measure of central tendency is the mode. With 
ordinal-level measurement, the median or mode can be used as indicators of central tendency. Interval and 
ratio-level measurement are typically considered the most desirable because they permit for any indicators 
of central tendency to be computed (i.e., mean, median, or mode). Also, ratio-level measurement is the only 
level that allows meaningful statements about r atios of scores. Once again, one c annot say that someone 
with an IQ of 140 is twice as intelligent as someone with an IQ of 70 because IQ is measured at the interval 
level, but one c an say that someone wi th six si blings has t wice as man y as some one wi th three because 
number of siblings is measured at the ratio level. 
 
Table 4.1 Summary of Levels of Measurements 
Level of Measurement Category labels Rank order Equal intervals True zero 
NOMINAL X 
ORDINAL X X 
INTERVAL X X X 
RATIO X X X X 
Notes 
1. Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1992). Normal personality assessment in clinical practice: The NEO Personality 
Inventory. Psychological Assessment, 4, 5–13. 
2. Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the adolescent self-image. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press 
3. Bandura, A., Ross, D., & Ross, S. A. (1961). Transmission of aggression through imitation of aggressive models. Journal of 
Abnormal and Social Psychology, 63, 575–582. 
4. Holmes, T. H., & Rahe, R. H. (1967). The Social Readjustment Rating Scale. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 11(2), 
213-218. 
5. Delongis, A., Coyne, J. C., Dakof, G., Folkman, S., & Lazarus, R. S. (1982). Relationships of daily hassles, uplifts, and major 
life events to health status. Health Psychology, 1(2), 119-136. 
6. Cohen, S., Kamarck, T., & Mermelstein, R. (1983). A global measure of perceived stress. Journal of Health and Social 
Behavior, 24, 386-396. 
7. Segerstrom, S. E., & Miller, G. E. (2004). Psychological stress and the human immune system: A meta-analytic study of 
30 years of inquiry. Psychological Bulletin, 130, 601–630. 
90  |  Understanding Psychological Measurement8. Stevens, S. S. (1946). On the theory of scales of measurement. Science, 103, 677–680. 
9. Levels of Measurement. Retrieved from http://wikieducator.org/
Introduction_to_Research_Methods_In_Psychology/Theories_and_Measurement/Levels_of_Measurement 
Understanding Psychological Measurement  |  9120.  Reliability and Validity of Measurement 
Learning Objectives 
1. Define reliability, including the different types and how they are assessed. 
2. Define validity, including the different types and how they are assessed. 
3. Describe the kinds of evidence that would be relevant to assessing the reliability and validity of a 
particular measure. 
 
Again, me asurement in volves assigning sc ores to individuals so tha t the y r epresent some char acteristic 
of the individuals. B ut ho w do r esearchers kno w tha t the sc ores ac tually r epresent the char acteristic, 
especially when i t is a c onstruct like intelligence, self-esteem, depression, or w orking memory capacity? 
The answer is that they conduct research using the measure to confirm that the scores make sense based on 
their understanding of the construct being measured. This is an e xtremely important point. Psychologists 
do not simply assume that their measures work. Instead, they collect data to demonstrate that they work. If 
their research does not demonstrate that a measure works, they stop using it. 
As an inf ormal example, imagine that you have been dieting for a mon th. Your clothes se em to be fi tting 
more loosely, and se veral friends ha ve asked if y ou have lost w eight. If at this poin t your bathroom scale 
indicated that you had lost 10 pounds, this would make sense and you would continue to use the scale. But if 
it indicated that you had gained 10 pounds, you would rightly conclude that it was broken and either fix it or 
get rid of it. In evaluating a measurement method, psychologists consider two general dimensions: reliability 
and validity. 
Reliability 
Reliability refers to the c onsistency of a measure. Psychologists consider three types of consistency: over 
time ( test-retest r eliability), acr oss i tems ( internal c onsistency), and acr oss dif ferent r esearchers ( inter-
rater reliability). 
Test-Retest Reliability 
When researchers measure a construct that they assume to be consistent across time, then the scores they 
92  |  Reliability and Validity of Measurementobtain should also be c onsistent across time. Test-retest reliability is the e xtent to which this is ac tually 
the case. For example, intelligence is generally thought to be consistent across time. A person who is highly 
intelligent toda y will be hig hly in telligent ne xt w eek. This me ans tha t an y g ood me asure o f in telligence 
should produce roughly the same sc ores for this individual ne xt week as i t does today. Clearly, a me asure 
that produces highly inconsistent scores over time c annot be a v ery good measure of a c onstruct that is 
supposed to be consistent. 
Assessing test-retest reliability requires using the measure on a group of people at one time, using i t again 
on the same group of people at a later time, and then looking at the test-retest correlation between the two 
sets of scores. This is t ypically done b y graphing the da ta in a sc atterplot and c omputing the c orrelation 
coefficient. Figure 4.2 shows the correlation between two sets of scores of several university students on the 
Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale, administered two times, a w eek apart. The c orrelation coefficient for these 
data is +.95. In general, a test-retest correlation of +.80 or greater is considered to indicate good reliability. 
Figure 4.2 Test-Retest Correlation Between Two Sets of Scores of Several College Students on the Rosenberg Self-Esteem 
Scale, Given Two Times a Week Apart 
Again, hig h test-r etest c orrelations mak e sense when the c onstruct being me asured is assume d to be 
consistent over time, which is the case for intelligence, self-esteem, and the Big Five personality dimensions. 
But other constructs are not assumed to be stable over time. The very nature of mood, for example, is that it 
changes. So a measure of mood that produced a low test-retest correlation over a period of a month would 
not be a cause for concern. 
Reliability and Validity of Measurement  |  93Internal Consistency 
Another kind o f reliability is  internal consistency, which is the c onsistency of people’s responses across 
the items on a multiple-i tem measure. In general, all the i tems on such me asures are supposed to r eflect 
the same under lying construct, so pe ople’s scores on those i tems should be c orrelated wi th each other. 
On the R osenberg Self -Esteem Sc ale, pe ople who agr ee tha t the y ar e a person o f worth should tend to 
agree tha t the y ha ve a number o f g ood quali ties. I f pe ople’s r esponses to the dif ferent i tems ar e not 
correlated with each other, then it would no longer make sense to claim that they are all measuring the same 
underlying construct. This is as true for behavioral and physiological measures as for self-report measures. 
For example, people might make a series of bets in a simulated game of roulette as a measure of their level 
of risk seeking. This measure would be internally consistent to the e xtent that individual participants’ bets 
were consistently high or low across trials. 
Like test-retest reliability, internal consistency can only be assessed by collecting and analyzing data. One 
approach is to look a t a split-half correlation. This in volves splitting the i tems into two sets, such as the 
first and second halves of the i tems or the e ven- and odd-numbered items. Then a sc ore is computed for 
each set of i tems, and the r elationship between the t wo sets of scores is e xamined. For example, Figure 
4.3 sho ws the spli t-half c orrelation be tween se veral univ ersity studen ts’ sc ores on the e ven-numbered 
items and their sc ores on the odd-number ed i tems of the R osenberg Self-Esteem Scale. The c orrelation 
coefficient for these da ta is +.88. A spli t-half correlation of +.80 or gr eater is g enerally considered good 
internal consistency. 
Figure 4.3 Split-Half Correlation Between Several College Students’ Scores on the Even-Numbered Items and Their Scores 
on the Odd-Numbered Items of the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale 
94  |  Reliability and Validity of MeasurementPerhaps the most common measure of internal consistency used by researchers in psychology is a statistic 
called Cronbach’s α (the Greek letter alpha). Conceptually, α is the mean of all possible split-half correlations 
for a set of items. For example, there are 252 ways to split a set of 10 items into two sets of five. Cronbach’s 
α would be the mean of the 252 split-half correlations. Note that this is not how α is actually computed, but 
it is a correct way of interpreting the meaning of this statistic. Again, a value of +.80 or greater is generally 
taken to indicate good internal consistency. 
Interrater Reliability 
Many beha vioral me asures in volve signific ant judgmen t on the par t o f an obser ver or a r ater. Inter-
rater reliability is the e xtent to which dif ferent observers are consistent in their judgmen ts. For example, 
if you were interested in me asuring university students’ social skills, y ou could make video recordings of 
them as the y interacted with another studen t whom the y are meeting for the first time. Then y ou could 
have two or more observers watch the videos and rate each student’s level of social skills. To the extent that 
each participant does, in fact, have some level of social skills that can be detected by an attentive observer, 
different observers’ ratings should be hig hly correlated with each other. Inter-rater reliability would also 
have been measured in Bandura’s Bobo doll stud y. In this c ase, the obser vers’ ratings of how many acts of 
aggression a particular child committed while playing with the Bobo doll should have been highly positively 
correlated. Interrater reliability is often assessed using Cronbach’s α when the judgments are quantitative or 
an analogous statistic called Cohen’s κ (the Greek letter kappa) when they are categorical. 
Validity 
Validity is the e xtent to which the sc ores fr om a me asure r epresent the v ariable the y ar e in tended to. 
But how do r esearchers make this judgmen t? We have already considered one fac tor that they take into 
account—reliability. When a measure has good test-retest reliability and internal consistency, researchers 
should be mor e confident that the sc ores represent what they are supposed to. Ther e has to be mor e to 
it, however, because a me asure c an be e xtremely reliable but ha ve no v alidity whatsoever. As an absur d 
example, imag ine some one who belie ves tha t pe ople’s inde x fing er length r eflects their self -esteem and 
therefore tries to measure self-esteem by holding a ruler up to people’s index fingers. Although this measure 
would have extremely good test-retest reliability, i t would have absolutely no v alidity. The fac t that one 
person’s index finger is a c entimeter longer than another’ s would indicate nothing about which one had 
higher self-esteem. 
Discussions of validity usually divide it into several distinct “types.” But a good way to interpret these types 
is that they are other kinds o f evidence—in addition to reliability—that should be tak en into account when 
judging the v alidity of a me asure. Here we consider three basic kinds: fac e validity, content validity, and 
criterion validity. 
Reliability and Validity of Measurement  |  95Face Validity 
Face validity is the extent to which a me asurement method appears “on its face” to measure the construct 
of in terest. M ost pe ople would e xpect a self -esteem questionnair e to include i tems about whe ther the y 
see themselves as a person o f worth and whe ther they think the y have good qualities. So a questionnair e 
that included these kinds o f items would have good face validity. The fing er-length method of measuring 
self-esteem, on the other hand, se ems to have nothing to do wi th self-esteem and therefore has poor face 
validity. Althoug h fac e v alidity c an be assesse d quan titatively—for e xample, b y ha ving a lar ge sample o f 
people rate a measure in terms of whether it appears to measure what it is intended to—it is usually assessed 
informally. 
Face validity is a t best a v ery weak kind o f evidence that a me asurement method is me asuring what it is 
supposed to. One reason is that it is based on people’s intuitions about human behavior, which are frequently 
wrong. It is also the c ase that many established measures in psy chology work qui te well despi te lacking 
face v alidity. The Minnesota Multiphasic P ersonality I nventory-2 (MMP I-2) me asures man y personali ty 
characteristics and disorders by having people decide whether each of over 567 different statements applies 
to them—where many of the sta tements do not ha ve any obvious relationship to the c onstruct that they 
measure. F or e xample, the i tems “I en joy de tective or m ystery stories” and “ The sig ht o f blood doesn ’t 
frighten me or mak e me sick” both me asure the suppr ession o f aggr ession. I n this c ase, i t is not the 
participants’ literal answers to these questions tha t are of interest, but r ather whether the pa ttern of the 
participants’ responses to a series o f questions ma tches those o f individuals who tend to suppr ess their 
aggression. 
Content Validity 
Content validity is the e xtent to which a me asure “ covers” the c onstruct o f in terest. F or e xample, if a 
researcher c onceptually defines test anxie ty as in volving both sympa thetic ner vous system ac tivation 
(leading to nervous feelings) and negative thoughts, then his me asure of test anxiety should include i tems 
about both ner vous f eelings and nega tive thoug hts. Or c onsider tha t a ttitudes ar e usuall y define d as 
involving thoug hts, feelings, and ac tions toward something. By this c onceptual definition, a person has a 
positive a ttitude to ward e xercise to the e xtent tha t the y think posi tive thoug hts about e xercising, f eels 
good about e xercising, and ac tually e xercises. So to ha ve g ood c ontent v alidity, a me asure o f pe ople’s 
attitudes toward exercise would have to reflect all three of these aspects. Like face validity, content validity 
is not usually assessed quantitatively. Instead, it is assessed by carefully checking the measurement method 
against the conceptual definition of the construct. 
Criterion Validity 
Criterion validity is the e xtent to which pe ople’s scores on a me asure are correlated with other v ariables 
96  |  Reliability and Validity of Measurement(known as cri teria) that one w ould expect them to be c orrelated with. For example, people’s scores on a 
new measure of test anxiety should be negatively correlated with their performance on an important school 
exam. If it were found that people’s scores were in fact negatively correlated with their exam performance, 
then this would be a piece of evidence that these scores really represent people’s test anxiety. But if it were 
found that people scored equally well on the e xam regardless of their test anxie ty scores, then this w ould 
cast doubt on the validity of the measure. 
A criterion can be any variable that one has reason to think should be c orrelated with the construct being 
measured, and ther e will usuall y be man y of them. F or example, one w ould expect test anxie ty scores to 
be negatively correlated with exam performance and course grades and positively correlated with general 
anxiety and wi th blood pr essure during an e xam. Or imag ine that a r esearcher develops a ne w measure 
of ph ysical risk taking. P eople’s sc ores on this me asure should be c orrelated wi th their par ticipation in 
“extreme” ac tivities such as sno wboarding and r ock climbing, the number o f spe eding tick ets the y ha ve 
received, and e ven the number o f br oken bones the y ha ve had o ver the y ears. W hen the cri terion is 
measured at the same time as the construct, criterion validity is referred to as concurrent validity; however, 
when the cri terion is me asured at some poin t in the futur e (after the c onstruct has be en measured), it is 
referred to as predictive validity (because scores on the measure have “predicted” a future outcome). 
Criteria c an also include other me asures o f the same c onstruct. F or e xample, one w ould e xpect ne w 
measures o f test anxie ty or ph ysical risk taking to be posi tively c orrelated wi th e xisting establishe d 
measures of the same constructs. This is known as convergent validity. 
Assessing convergent validity requires collecting data using the me asure. Researchers John Cacioppo and 
Richard Petty did this when the y created their self-report Need for Cognition Scale to measure how much 
people v alue and engag e in thinking ( Cacioppo & P etty, 1982) 1. I n a series o f studies, the y sho wed tha t 
people’s scores were positively correlated with their scores on a standar dized academic achievement test, 
and tha t their sc ores w ere nega tively c orrelated wi th their sc ores on a me asure o f dogma tism ( which 
represents a tendency toward obedience). In the years since it was created, the Need for Cognition Scale has 
been used in literally hundreds of studies and has been shown to be correlated with a wide variety of other 
variables, including the ef fectiveness of an ad vertisement, interest in poli tics, and jur or decisions (Petty, 
Briñol, Loersch, & McCaslin, 2009)2. 
Discriminant Validity 
Discriminant validity, on the other hand, is the extent to which scores on a measure are not correlated with 
measures of variables that are conceptually distinct. For example, self-esteem is a g eneral attitude toward 
the self that is fairly stable over time. It is not the same as mood, which is how good or bad one happens to be 
feeling right now. So people’s scores on a new measure of self-esteem should not be very highly correlated 
with their moods. If the new measure of self-esteem were highly correlated with a measure of mood, it could 
be argued that the new measure is not really measuring self-esteem; it is measuring mood instead. 
When they created the Need for Cognition Scale, Cacioppo and Petty also provided evidence of discriminant 
validity b y sho wing tha t pe ople’s sc ores w ere not c orrelated wi th c ertain other v ariables. F or e xample, 
Reliability and Validity of Measurement  |  97they found only a w eak correlation between people’s need for cognition and a me asure of their c ognitive 
style—the extent to which they tend to think analytically by breaking ideas into smaller parts or holistically 
in terms o f “the big pic ture.” The y also f ound no c orrelation be tween pe ople’s ne ed f or c ognition and 
measures o f their test anxie ty and their tendenc y to r espond in sociall y desir able w ays. All these lo w 
correlations provide evidence that the measure is reflecting a conceptually distinct construct. 
Notes 
1. Cacioppo, J. T., & Petty, R. E. (1982). The need for cognition. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 42, 116–131. 
2. Petty, R. E, Briñol, P., Loersch, C., & McCaslin, M. J. (2009). The need for cognition. In M. R. Leary & R. H. Hoyle (Eds.), 
Handbook of individual differences in social behavior (pp. 318–329). New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
98  |  Reliability and Validity of Measurement21.  Practical Strategies for Psychological 
Measurement 
Learning Objectives 
1. Specify the four broad steps in the measurement process. 
2. Explain how you would decide whether to use an existing measure or create your own. 
3. Describe multiple strategies to identify and locate existing measures of psychological constructs. 
4. Describe several general principles for creating new measures and for implementing existing and new 
measures. 
5. Create a simple plan for assessing the reliability and validity of an existing or new measure. 
 
So far in this chapter, we have considered several basic ideas about the nature of psychological constructs 
and their me asurement. B ut no w imag ine tha t y ou ar e in the posi tion o f ac tually ha ving to me asure a 
psychological construct for a research project. How should you proceed? Broadly speaking, there are four 
steps in the me asurement process: (a) conceptually defining the c onstruct, (b) operationally defining the 
construct, (c) implementing the measure, and (d) evaluating the measure. In this section, we will look at each 
of these steps in turn. 
Conceptually Defining the Construct 
Having a clear and complete conceptual definition of a construct is a pr erequisite for good measurement. 
For one thing, it allows you to make sound decisions about exactly how to measure the construct. If you had 
only a v ague idea that you wanted to me asure people’s “memory,” for example, you would have no w ay to 
choose whether you should have them remember a list of vocabulary words, a set of photographs, a newly 
learned skill, an experience from long ago, or have them remember to perform a task at a later time. Because 
psychologists now conceptualize memory as a set of semi-independent systems, you would have to be more 
precise about what you mean by “memory.” If you are interested in long-term episodic memory (memory for 
previous experiences), then having participants remember a list of words that they learned last week would 
make sense, but ha ving them tr y to remember to execute a task in the futur e would not. In general, there 
is no substitute for reading the research literature on a construct and paying close attention to how others 
have defined it. 
Practical Strategies for Psychological Measurement  |  99Operationally Defining the Construct 
Once y ou ha ve a c onceptual defini tion o f the c onstruct y ou ar e in terested in stud ying i t is time to 
operationally define the c onstruct. Recall an oper ational definition is a defini tion of the v ariable in terms 
of pr ecisely ho w i t is to be me asured. S ince most v ariables ar e r elatively abstr act c oncepts tha t c annot 
be dir ectly obser ved ( e.g., str ess), and obser vation is a t the he art o f the scien tific me thod, c onceptual 
definitions must be transformed into something that can be directly observed and measured. Most variables 
can be oper ationally defined in man y different ways. For example, stress can be oper ationally defined as 
people’s scores on a stress scale such as the Perceived Stress Scale (Cohen, Kamarck, & Mermelstein, 1983) 1, 
cortisol concentrations in their saliva, or the number of stressful life events they have recently experienced. 
As described below, operationally defining your variable(s) of interest may involve using an existing measure 
or creating your own measure. 
Using an Existing Measure 
It is usuall y a g ood idea to use an e xisting measure that has be en used successfully in pr evious research. 
Among the advantages are that (a) you save the time and tr ouble of creating your own, (b) there is already 
some evidence that the measure is valid (if it has been used successfully), and (c) your results can more easily 
be compared with and c ombined with previous results. In fact, if ther e already exists a r eliable and v alid 
measure of a c onstruct, other r esearchers might expect you to use i t unless y ou have a g ood and cle arly 
stated reason for not doing so. 
If you choose to use an existing measure, you may still have to choose among several alternatives. You might 
choose the most c ommon one, the one wi th the best e vidence of reliability and validity, the one tha t best 
measures a particular aspect of a construct that you are interested in (e.g., a physiological measure of stress 
if you are most in terested in i ts underlying physiology), or e ven the one tha t would be e asiest to use. F or 
example, the Ten-Item Personality Inventory (TIPI) is a self -report questionnaire that measures all the B ig 
Five personality dimensions wi th just 10 i tems (Gosling, Rentfrow, & S wann, 2003)2. It is not as r eliable or 
valid as long er and mor e comprehensive measures, but a r esearcher might choose to use i t when testing 
time is severely limited. 
When an e xisting measure was created primarily for use in scien tific research, i t is usuall y descri bed in 
detail in a publishe d r esearch ar ticle and is fr ee to use in y our o wn r esearch—with a pr oper ci tation. 
You mig ht find tha t la ter r esearchers who use the same me asure descri be i t onl y briefl y but pr ovide a 
reference to the orig inal article, in which c ase you would have to g et the de tails from the orig inal article. 
The American Psychological Association also publishes the Directory of Unpublished Experimental Measures
and PsycTESTS, which ar e e xtensive c atalogs/collections o f me asures tha t ha ve be en use d in pr evious 
research. Man y e xisting me asures—especially those tha t ha ve applic ations in clinic al psy chology—are 
proprietary. This me ans tha t a publisher o wns the rig hts to them and tha t y ou w ould ha ve to pur chase 
them. These include man y standard intelligence tests, the Be ck Depression Inventory, and the Minnesota 
Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI). Details about man y of these me asures and ho w to obtain them 
100  |  Practical Strategies for Psychological Measurementcan be f ound in other r eference books, including  Tests in Print  and the  Mental M easurements Yearbook. 
There is a good chance you can find these reference books in your university library. 
Creating Your Own Measure 
Instead o f using an e xisting me asure, y ou mig ht w ant to cr eate y our o wn. P erhaps ther e is no e xisting 
measure o f the c onstruct y ou ar e in terested in or e xisting ones ar e too dif ficult or time-c onsuming to 
use. Or per haps you want to use a ne w measure specifically to se e whether it works in the same w ay as 
existing measures—that is, to evaluate convergent validity. In this section, we consider some general issues 
in creating new measures that apply equally to self -report, behavioral, and ph ysiological measures. More 
detailed guidelines for creating self-report measures are presented in Chapter 7. 
First, be a ware that most ne w measures in psy chology are really variations of existing measures, so y ou 
should still look to the r esearch li terature f or ide as. P erhaps y ou c an modif y an e xisting questionnair e, 
create a paper -and-pencil version of a me asure that is normall y computerized (or vice versa), or adapt a 
measure that has traditionally been used for another purpose. For example, the famous Stroop task (Stroop, 
1935)3—in which people quickly name the colors that various color words are printed in—has been adapted 
for the study of social anxiety. People high in social anxiety are slower at color naming when the words have 
negative social connotations such as “stupid” (Amir, Freshman, & Foa, 2002)4. 
When you create a new measure, you should strive for simplicity. Remember that your participants are not 
as interested in y our research as y ou are and tha t they will v ary widely in their abili ty to understand and 
carry out whatever task you give them. You should create a set of clear instructions using simple language 
that you can present in writing or read aloud (or both). It is also a good idea to include one or more practice 
items so that participants can become familiar with the task, and to build in an opportunity for them to ask 
questions before continuing. It is also best to k eep the me asure brief to a void boring or frustr ating your 
participants to the point that their responses start to become less reliable and valid. 
The ne ed f or br evity, ho wever, ne eds to be w eighed against the fac t tha t i t is ne arly al ways be tter f or 
a me asure to include multiple i tems r ather than a sing le i tem. Ther e ar e t wo r easons f or this. One is a 
matter o f c ontent validity. Multiple i tems are o ften required to c over a c onstruct ade quately. The other 
is a ma tter o f r eliability. P eople’s r esponses to sing le i tems c an be influenc ed b y all sor ts o f irr elevant 
factors—misunderstanding the particular item, a momentary distraction, or a simple error such as checking 
the wr ong r esponse option. B ut when se veral r esponses ar e summe d or a veraged, the ef fects o f these 
irrelevant factors tend to cancel each other out to produce more reliable scores. Remember, however, that 
multiple items must be struc tured in a w ay that allows them to be c ombined into a sing le overall score by 
summing or averaging. To measure “financial responsibility,” a student might ask people about their annual 
income, obtain their credit score, and have them rate how “thrifty” they are—but there is no obvious way to 
combine these responses into an overall score. To create a true multiple-i tem measure, the student might 
instead ask people to rate the degree to which 10 sta tements about financial r esponsibility describe them 
on the same five-point scale. 
Finally, the v ery best w ay to assur e yourself that your measure has cle ar instructions, includes suf ficient 
Practical Strategies for Psychological Measurement  |  101practice, and is an appropriate length is to test several people. Observe them as they complete the task, time 
them, and ask them af terward to c omment on how easy or dif ficult it was, whether the instruc tions were 
clear, and anything else you might be wondering about. Obviously, it is better to discover problems with a 
measure before beginning any large-scale data collection. 
Implementing the Measure 
You will want to implement any measure in a way that maximizes its reliability and validity. In most cases, it 
is best to test everyone under similar conditions that, ideally, are quiet and free of distractions. Participants 
are often tested in groups because it is efficient, but be aware that it can create distractions that reduce the 
reliability and validity of the measure. As always, it is good to use previous research as a guide. If others have 
successfully tested people in groups using a particular measure, then you should consider doing it too. 
Be aware also tha t people can react in a v ariety of ways to being me asured that reduce the r eliability and 
validity of the scores. Although some disagreeable participants might intentionally respond in ways meant 
to disrupt a stud y, par ticipant reactivity is mor e likely to tak e the opposi te form. Agreeable par ticipants 
might r espond in w ays the y belie ve the y ar e e xpected to. Some par ticipants mig ht engag e in 
socially desirable responding, doing or saying things because they think it is the socially appropriate thing. 
For example, people with low self-esteem agree that they feel they are a person of worth not because they 
really feel this way but because they believe this is the socially appropriate response and do not want to look 
bad in the e yes of the researcher. Additionally, research studies can have built-in demand characteristics: 
subtle cues that reveal how the researcher expects participants to behave. For example, a participant whose 
attitude toward exercise is measured immediately after she is asked to read a passage about the dangers of 
heart disease might reasonably conclude that the passag e was meant to impr ove her a ttitude. As a r esult, 
she might respond more favorably because she believes she is e xpected to by the researcher. Finally, your 
own expectations can bias participants’ behaviors in unintended ways. 
There ar e se veral pr ecautions y ou c an tak e to minimiz e these kinds o f r eactivity. One is to mak e the 
procedure as cle ar and brief as possi ble so that participants are not tempte d to v ent their frustrations on 
your results. Another is to guarantee participants’ anonymity and make clear to them that you are doing so. 
If you are testing them in gr oups, be sure that they are seated far enough apart that they cannot see each 
other’s responses. Give them all the same t ype of writing implement so tha t they cannot be iden tified by, 
for example, the pink glitter pen that they used. You can even allow them to seal completed questionnaires 
into individual envelopes or put them in to a drop box where they immediately become mixed with others’ 
questionnaires. Although informed consent requires telling participants what they will be doing, it does not 
require revealing your hypothesis or other inf ormation that might suggest to participants how you expect 
them to respond. A questionnaire designed to measure financial responsibility need not be ti tled “Are You 
Financially Responsible?” It could be titled “Money Questionnaire” or have no title at all. Finally, the effects 
of your expectations can be minimized by arranging to have the measure administered by a helper who is 
“blind” or unaware of its intent or of any hypothesis being tested. Regardless of whether this is possible, you 
should standardize all in teractions between researchers and par ticipants—for example, by always reading 
the same set of instructions word for word. 
102  |  Practical Strategies for Psychological MeasurementEvaluating the Measure 
Once you have used your measure on a sample o f people and have a set of scores, you are in a posi tion to 
evaluate it more thoroughly in terms of reliability and validity. Even if the measure has been used extensively 
by other researchers and has already shown evidence of reliability and validity, you should not assume that 
it worked as expected for your particular sample and under y our particular testing conditions. Regardless, 
you now have additional evidence bearing on the reliability and validity of the measure, and it would make 
sense to add that evidence to the research literature. 
In most research designs, it is not possible to assess test-retest reliability because participants are tested at 
only one time. F or a new measure, you might design a stud y specifically to assess i ts test-retest reliability 
by testing the same se t of participants at two separate times. I n other c ases, a stud y designed to answ er 
a dif ferent question still allo ws f or the assessmen t o f test-r etest r eliability. F or e xample, a psy chology 
instructor mig ht me asure his studen ts’ a ttitude to ward cri tical thinking using the same me asure a t the 
beginning and end of the semester to see if there is any change. Even if there is no change, he could still look 
at the correlation between students’ scores at the two times to assess the me asure’s test-retest reliability. 
It is also customar y to assess in ternal consistency for any multiple-item measure—usually by looking a t a 
split-half correlation or Cronbach’s α. 
Criterion v alidity c an be assesse d in v arious w ays. F or e xample, if y our stud y include d mor e than one 
measure o f the same c onstruct or me asures o f c onceptually distinc t c onstructs, then y ou should look 
at the c orrelations among these me asures to be sur e tha t the y fi t y our e xpectations. N ote also tha t a 
successful experimental manipulation also pr ovides evidence of cri terion validity. Recall that MacDonald 
and Martineau manipulated participant’s moods by having them think either positive or negative thoughts, 
and after the manipulation, their mood measure showed a distinct difference between the two groups. This 
simultaneously provided evidence that their mood manipula tion worked and that their mood me asure was 
valid. 
But what if y our newly collected data cast doubt on the r eliability or v alidity of your measure? The shor t 
answer is tha t you have to ask wh y. It could be tha t there is some thing wrong with your measure or ho w 
you administered it. It could be that there is something wrong with your conceptual definition. It could be 
that your experimental manipulation failed. For example, if a mood measure showed no difference between 
people whom you instructed to think positive versus negative thoughts, maybe it is because the participants 
did not actually think the thoughts they were supposed to or that the thoughts did not actually affect their 
moods. In short, it is “back to the drawing board” to revise the measure, revise the conceptual definition, or 
try a new manipulation. 
Notes 
1. Cohen, S., Kamarck, T., & Mermelstein, R. (1983). A global measure of perceived stress. Journal of Health and Social 
Behavior, 24, 386-396. 
2. Gosling, S. D., Rentfrow, P. J., & Swann, W. B., Jr. (2003). A very brief measure of the Big Five personality domains. 
Practical Strategies for Psychological Measurement  |  103Journal of Research in Personality, 37, 504–528. 
3. Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18, 643–662. 
4. Amir, N., Freshman, M., & Foa, E. (2002). Enhanced Stroop interference for threat in social phobia. Journal of Anxiety 
Disorders, 16, 1–9. 
104  |  Practical Strategies for Psychological Measurement22.  Key Takeaways and Exercises 
Key Takeaways 
• Measurement is the assignment of scores to individuals so that the scores represent some characteristic 
of the individuals. Psychological measurement can be achieved in a wide variety of ways, including self-
report, behavioral, and physiological measures. 
• Psychological constructs such as intelligence, self-esteem, and depression are variables that are not 
directly observable because they represent behavioral tendencies or complex patterns of behavior and 
internal processes. An important goal of scientific research is to conceptually define psychological 
constructs in ways that accurately describe them. 
• For any conceptual definition of a construct, there will be many different operational definitions or ways 
of measuring it. The use of multiple operational definitions, or converging operations, is a common 
strategy in psychological research. 
• Variables can be measured at four different levels—nominal, ordinal, interval, and ratio—that 
communicate increasing amounts of quantitative information. The level of measurement affects the kinds 
of statistics you can use and conclusions you can draw from your data. 
• Psychological researchers do not simply assume that their measures work. Instead, they conduct 
research to show that they work. If they cannot show that they work, they stop using them. 
• There are two distinct criteria by which researchers evaluate their measures: reliability and validity. 
Reliability is consistency across time (test-retest reliability), across items (internal consistency), and 
across researchers (interrater reliability). Validity is the extent to which the scores actually represent the 
variable they are intended to. 
• Validity is a judgment based on various types of evidence. The relevant evidence includes the measure’s 
reliability, whether it covers the construct of interest, and whether the scores it produces are correlated 
with other variables they are expected to be correlated with and not correlated with variables that are 
conceptually distinct. 
• Good measurement begins with a clear conceptual definition of the construct to be measured. This is 
accomplished both by clear and detailed thinking and by a review of the research literature. 
• You often have the option of using an existing measure or creating a new measure. You should make this 
decision based on the availability of existing measures and their adequacy for your purposes. 
• Several simple steps can be taken in creating new measures and in implementing both existing and new 
measures that can help maximize reliability and validity. 
• Once you have used a measure, you should reevaluate its reliability and validity based on your new data. 
Remember that the assessment of reliability and validity is an ongoing process. 
Key Takeaways and Exercises  |  105