CHAPTER  V 
EXPERIMENTAL RESEARCH 
In the late 1960s social psychologists John Darley and Bibb Latané proposed a counter-intuitive hypothesis. 
The more witnesses there are to an ac cident or a crime, the less lik ely any of them is to help the vic tim 
(Darley & Latané, 1968)1. 
They also sugg ested the the ory that this phenomenon oc curs because each witness feels less r esponsible 
for helping—a pr ocess referred to as the “ diffusion of responsibility.” Darley and L atané noted that their 
ideas were consistent with many real-world cases. For example, a New York woman named Catherine “Kitty” 
Genovese w as assa ulted and mur dered while se veral wi tnesses e vidently faile d to help. B ut D arley and 
Latané also understood that such isolated cases did not provide convincing evidence for their hypothesized 
“bystander effect.” There was no way to know, for example, whether any of the witnesses to Kitty Genovese’s 
murder would have helped had there been fewer of them. 
So to test their hypothesis, Darley and Latané created a simulated emergency situation in a laboratory. Each 
of their univ ersity student participants was isolated in a small r oom and told tha t they would be ha ving a 
discussion about university life with other students via an intercom system. Early in the discussion, however, 
one o f the studen ts began ha ving wha t se emed to be an epileptic seizur e. Ov er the in tercom c ame the 
following: “I could really-er-use some help so if somebody would-er-give me a little h-help-uh-er-er-er-er-
er c-could somebody-er-er-help-er-uh-uh-uh (choking sounds)…I’m gonna die-er-er-I’m…gonna die-er-
help-er-er-seizure-er- [chokes, then quiet]” (Darley & Latané, 1968, p. 379). 
In actuality, there were no other studen ts. These c omments had be en prerecorded and w ere played back 
to create the appe arance of a r eal emergency. The k ey to the stud y was that some par ticipants were told 
that the discussion involved only one other student (the victim), others were told that it involved two other 
students, and still others were told that it included five other students. Because this was the only difference 
between these three groups of participants, any difference in their tendency to help the victim would have 
to have been caused by it. And sure enough, the likelihood that the participant left the room to seek help for 
the “victim” decreased from 85% to 62% to 31% as the number of “witnesses” increased. 
 
The Parable of the 38 Witnesses 
The story of Kitty Genovese has been told and retold in numerous psychology textbooks. The standard version 
is that there were 38 witnesses to the crime, that all of them watched (or listened) for an extended period of 
time, and that none of them did anything to help. However, recent scholarship suggests that the standard story 
is inaccurate in many ways (Manning, Levine, & Collins, 2007)2. For example, only six eyewitnesses testified at 
the trial, none of them was aware that they were witnessing a lethal assault, and there have been several 
Experimental Research  |  107reports of witnesses calling the police or even coming to the aid of Kitty Genovese. Although the standard 
story inspired a long line of research on the bystander effect and the diffusion of responsibility, it may also have 
directed researchers’ and students’ attention away from other equally interesting and important issues in the 
psychology of helping—including the conditions in which people do in fact respond collectively to emergency 
situations. 
 
The r esearch tha t D arley and L atané c onducted w as a par ticular kind o f stud y c alled an e xperiment. 
Experiments ar e use d to de termine not onl y whe ther ther e is a me aningful r elationship be tween t wo 
variables but also whe ther the relationship is a c ausal one that is supported by statistical analysis. For this 
reason, experiments are one of the most common and useful tools in the psychological researcher’s toolbox. 
In this chapter, we look a t experiments in de tail. We will first c onsider what sets experiments apart from 
other kinds o f studies and wh y they support causal conclusions while other kinds o f studies do not. W e 
then look a t t wo basic w ays o f designing an e xperiment—between-subjects designs and wi thin-subjects 
designs—and discuss their pr os and cons. Finally, we consider several important practical issues that arise 
when conducting experiments. 
Notes 
1. Darley, J. M., & Latané, B. (1968). Bystander intervention in emergencies: Diffusion of responsibility. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 4, 377–383. 
2. Manning, R., Levine, M., & Collins, A. (2007). The Kitty Genovese murder and the social psychology of helping: The 
parable of the 38 witnesses. American Psychologist, 62, 555–562. 
108  |  Experimental Research23.  Experiment Basics 
Learning Objectives 
1. Explain what an experiment is and recognize examples of studies that are experiments and studies that 
are not experiments. 
2. Distinguish between the manipulation of the independent variable and control of extraneous variables 
and explain the importance of each. 
3. Recognize examples of confounding variables and explain how they affect the internal validity of a study. 
4. Define what a control condition is, explain its purpose in research on treatment effectiveness, and 
describe some alternative types of control conditions. 
What Is an Experiment? 
As w e sa w e arlier in the book, an  experiment is a t ype o f stud y designe d spe cifically to answ er the 
question of whether there is a causal relationship between two variables. In other words, whether changes 
in one v ariable (referred to as an independent v ariable) cause a chang e in another v ariable (referred to 
as a dependent v ariable). Experimen ts ha ve t wo fundamen tal f eatures. The first is tha t the r esearchers 
manipulate, or systema tically v ary, the le vel o f the independen t v ariable. The dif ferent le vels o f the 
independent v ariable ar e c alled conditions. F or e xample, in D arley and L atané’s e xperiment, the 
independent variable was the number of witnesses that participants believed to be present. The researchers 
manipulated this independent variable by telling participants that there were either one, two, or five other 
students in volved in the discussion, ther eby cr eating thr ee c onditions. F or a ne w r esearcher, i t is e asy 
to confuse these terms b y believing there are three independent variables in this si tuation: one, t wo, or 
five studen ts in volved in the discussion, but ther e is ac tually onl y one independen t v ariable (number o f 
witnesses) wi th three dif ferent le vels or c onditions (one, t wo or fiv e students). The se cond fundamental 
feature of an experiment is that the researcher exerts control over, or minimizes the variability in, variables 
other than the independent and dependent variable. These other variables are called extraneous variables. 
Darley and L atané tested all their par ticipants in the same r oom, exposed them to the same emer gency 
situation, and so on. The y also randomly assigned their participants to conditions so that the three groups 
would be similar to each other to begin with. Notice that although the words manipulation and control have 
similar me anings in e veryday languag e, r esearchers mak e a cle ar distinc tion be tween them. The y
manipulate the independen t v ariable b y systema tically chang ing i ts le vels and control other v ariables b y 
holding them constant. 
Experiment Basics  |  109Manipulation of the Independent Variable 
Again, to  manipulate an independen t v ariable me ans to chang e i ts le vel systema tically so tha t dif ferent 
groups of par ticipants are exposed to dif ferent levels of that variable, or the same gr oup of par ticipants 
is e xposed to dif ferent le vels a t dif ferent times. F or e xample, to se e whe ther e xpressive wri ting af fects 
people’s health, a r esearcher mig ht instruct some par ticipants to wri te about tr aumatic experiences and 
others to wri te about neutral experiences. The dif ferent levels of the independent variable are referred to 
as conditions, and researchers often give the conditions short descriptive names to make it easy to talk and 
write about them. I n this c ase, the c onditions might be c alled the “tr aumatic condition” and the “ neutral 
condition.” 
Notice tha t the manipula tion o f an independen t v ariable must in volve the ac tive in tervention o f the 
researcher. Comparing groups of people who differ on the independent variable before the study begins is 
not the same as manipula ting that variable. For example, a researcher who compares the health of people 
who already keep a journal wi th the he alth of people who do not k eep a journal has not manipula ted this 
variable and therefore has not conducted an experiment. This distinction is important because groups that 
already dif fer in one w ay at the beg inning of a stud y are likely to dif fer in other w ays too. F or example, 
people who choose to k eep journals mig ht also be mor e conscientious, more introverted, or less str essed 
than people who do not. Therefore, any observed difference between the two groups in terms of their health 
might have been caused by whether or not they keep a journal, or i t might have been caused by any of the 
other differences between people who do and do not k eep journals. Thus the ac tive manipulation of the 
independent variable is crucial for eliminating potential alternative explanations for the results. 
Of course, there are many situations in which the independent variable cannot be manipulated for practical 
or ethical reasons and therefore an experiment is not possi ble. For example, whether or not people have a 
significant early illness experience cannot be manipulated, making it impossible to conduct an experiment 
on the effect of early illness experiences on the development of hypochondriasis. This caveat does not mean 
it is impossible to study the relationship between early illness experiences and hypochondriasis—only that 
it must be done using nonexperimental approaches. We will discuss this type of methodology in detail later 
in the book. 
Independent v ariables c an be manipula ted to cr eate t wo c onditions and e xperiments in volving a sing le 
independent variable with two conditions are often referred to as a single factor two-level design. However, 
sometimes greater insights can be gained by adding more conditions to an experiment. When an experiment 
has one independent variable that is manipulated to produce more than two conditions it is referred to as 
a single factor multi level design. So rather than c omparing a c ondition in which ther e was one wi tness 
to a condition in which there were five witnesses (which would represent a single-factor two-level design), 
Darley and L atané’s experiment used a sing le factor multi-level design, b y manipulating the independen t 
variable to produce three conditions (a one witness, a two witnesses, and a five witnesses condition). 
110  |  Experiment BasicsControl of Extraneous Variables 
As we have seen previously in the chapter , an extraneous variable is anything that varies in the c ontext of 
a study other than the independen t and dependent variables. In an experiment on the ef fect of expressive 
writing on he alth, f or e xample, e xtraneous v ariables w ould include par ticipant v ariables ( individual 
differences) such as their wri ting ability, their die t, and their g ender. They would also include si tuational 
or task v ariables such as the time o f da y when par ticipants wri te, whe ther the y wri te b y hand or on a 
computer, and the w eather. Extraneous variables pose a pr oblem because many of them are likely to have 
some effect on the dependen t variable. For example, participants’ health will be af fected by many things 
other than whether or not they engage in expressive writing. This influencing factor can make it difficult to 
separate the effect of the independent variable from the effects of the extraneous variables, which is why it 
is important to control extraneous variables by holding them constant. 
Extraneous Variables as “Noise” 
Extraneous variables make it difficult to detect the effect of the independent variable in two ways. One is by 
adding variability or “noise” to the data. Imagine a simple experiment on the effect of mood (happy vs. sad) 
on the number o f happy childhood events people are able to r ecall. Participants are put into a negative or 
positive mood (by showing them a happy or sad video clip) and then asked to recall as many happy childhood 
events as they can. The two leftmost columns of Table 5.1 show what the data might look like if there were no 
extraneous variables and the number o f happy childhood events participants recalled was affected only by 
their moods. Every participant in the happ y mood condition recalled exactly four happy childhood events, 
and every participant in the sad mood c ondition recalled exactly three. The ef fect of mood her e is qui te 
obvious. In reality, however, the da ta would probably look mor e like those in the t wo rightmost columns 
of Table 5.1 . E ven in the happ y mood c ondition, some par ticipants w ould r ecall f ewer happ y memories 
because they have fewer to draw on, use less ef fective recall strategies, or are less motivated. And even in 
the sad mood condition, some participants would recall more happy childhood memories because they have 
more happy memories to dr aw on, the y use mor e effective recall strategies, or the y are more motivated. 
Although the mean difference between the two groups is the same as in the ide alized data, this difference 
is much less obvious in the context of the greater variability in the data. Thus one reason researchers try to 
control extraneous variables is so their da ta look more like the idealized data in Table 5.1, which makes the 
effect of the independent variable easier to detect (although real data never look quite that good). 
 
Experiment Basics  |  111Table 5.1 Hypothetical Noiseless Data and Realistic 
Noisy Data 
Idealized “noiseless” data Realistic “noisy” data 
Happy mood Sad mood Happy mood Sad mood 
4 3 3 1 
4 3 6 3 
4 3 2 4 
4 3 4 0 
4 3 5 5 
4 3 2 7 
4 3 3 2 
4 3 1 5 
4 3 6 1 
4 3 8 2 
M = 4 M = 3 M = 4 M = 3 
 
One w ay to c ontrol e xtraneous v ariables is to hold them c onstant. This te chnique c an me an holding 
situation or task v ariables constant by testing all par ticipants in the same loc ation, g iving them iden tical 
instructions, tr eating them in the same w ay, and so on. I t c an also me an holding par ticipant v ariables 
constant. For example, many studies o f language limit participants to rig ht-handed people, who g enerally 
have their languag e areas isolated in their lef t cerebral hemispheres1. Left-handed people are more likely 
to ha ve their languag e ar eas isola ted in their rig ht c erebral hemispher es or distri buted acr oss both 
hemispheres, which can change the way they process language and thereby add noise to the data. 
In principle, r esearchers c an c ontrol e xtraneous v ariables b y limi ting par ticipants to one v ery spe cific 
category o f person, such as 20- year-old, he terosexual, f emale, rig ht-handed psy chology majors. The 
obvious downside to this approach is that it would lower the external validity of the study—in particular, the 
extent to which the results can be generalized beyond the people actually studied. For example, it might be 
unclear whether results obtained with a sample of younger lesbian women would apply to older gay men. In 
many situations, the advantages of a diverse sample (increased external validity) outweigh the reduction in 
noise achieved by a homogeneous one. 
Extraneous Variables as Confounding Variables 
The se cond w ay tha t e xtraneous v ariables c an mak e i t dif ficult to de tect the ef fect o f the independen t 
variable is by becoming confounding variables. A confounding variable is an extraneous variable that differs 
on a verage across levels o f the independen t v ariable ( i.e., i t is an e xtraneous v ariable tha t v aries 
systematically wi th the independen t v ariable). F or e xample, in almost all e xperiments, par ticipants’ 
112  |  Experiment Basicsintelligence quotients (IQs) will be an e xtraneous variable. But as long as ther e are participants with lower 
and hig her I Qs in e ach c ondition so tha t the a verage I Q is r oughly e qual acr oss the c onditions, then 
this variation is pr obably acceptable (and may even be desir able). What would be bad, ho wever, would be 
for par ticipants in one c ondition to ha ve substantially lower IQs on a verage and par ticipants in another 
condition to have substantially higher IQs on average. In this case, IQ would be a confounding variable. 
To c onfound me ans to confuse, and this ef fect is e xactly wh y c onfounding v ariables ar e undesir able. 
Because they dif fer systematically across conditions—just like the independen t variable—they provide an 
alternative explanation for any observed difference in the dependen t variable. Figure 5.1 shows the results 
of a h ypothetical stud y, in which par ticipants in a posi tive mood c ondition sc ored hig her on a memor y 
task than par ticipants in a nega tive mood condition. But if IQ is a c onfounding variable—with participants 
in the posi tive mood c ondition ha ving hig her I Qs on a verage than par ticipants in the nega tive mood 
condition—then it is unclear whether it was the positive moods or the hig her IQs that caused participants 
in the first c ondition to sc ore hig her. One w ay to a void c onfounding v ariables is b y holding e xtraneous 
variables constant. For example, one c ould prevent IQ from becoming a c onfounding variable by limiting 
participants only to those with IQs of exactly 100. But this approach is not always desirable for reasons we 
have already discussed. A second and much more general approach—random assignment to conditions—will 
be discussed in detail shortly. 
Figure 5.1 Hypothetical Results From a Study on the Effect of Mood on Memory. Because IQ also differs across conditions, it 
is a confounding variable. 
Treatment and Control Conditions 
In psy chological r esearch, a treatment is an y in tervention me ant to chang e pe ople’s beha vior f or the 
better. This intervention includes psychotherapies and medical treatments for psychological disorders but 
also in terventions designe d to impr ove le arning, pr omote c onservation, r educe pr ejudice, and so on. T o 
Experiment Basics  |  113determine whether a treatment works, participants are randomly assigned to either a treatment condition, 
in which the y receive the tr eatment, or a control condition, in which the y do not r eceive the tr eatment. 
If participants in the tr eatment condition end up be tter off than participants in the c ontrol condition—for 
example, they are less depressed, learn faster, conserve more, express less prejudice—then the researcher 
can conclude that the tr eatment works. In research on the ef fectiveness of psychotherapies and me dical 
treatments, this type of experiment is often called a randomized clinical trial. 
There are different types of control conditions. In a no-treatment control condition, participants receive 
no treatment whatsoever. One problem with this approach, however, is the e xistence of placebo effects. A
placebo is a simulated treatment that lacks any active ingredient or element that should make it effective, 
and a placebo effect is a posi tive effect of such a tr eatment. Many folk remedies that seem to work—such 
as eating chicken soup f or a c old or placing soap under the be d sheets to stop nig httime leg cr amps—are 
probably nothing more than placebos. Although placebo effects are not well understood, they are probably 
driven primarily by people’s expectations that they will impr ove. Having the e xpectation to impr ove c an 
result in r educed stress, anxiety, and depr ession, which c an alter per ceptions and e ven improve immune 
system functioning (Price, Finniss, & Benedetti, 2008)2. 
Placebo ef fects ar e in teresting in their o wn rig ht (see Note “ The P owerful P lacebo”), but the y also pose 
a serious pr oblem for researchers who w ant to de termine whether a tr eatment works. Figure 5.2 shows 
some hypothetical results in which par ticipants in a tr eatment condition improved more on a verage than 
participants in a no-tr eatment control condition. If these c onditions (the two leftmost bars in Figure 5.2) 
were the only conditions in this experiment, however, one could not conclude that the treatment worked. It 
could be instead that participants in the treatment group improved more because they expected to improve, 
while those in the no-treatment control condition did not. 
Figure 5.2 Hypothetical Results From a Study Including Treatment, No-Treatment, and Placebo Conditions 
114  |  Experiment BasicsFortunately, there are several solutions to this pr oblem. One is to include a placebo control condition, in 
which par ticipants r eceive a plac ebo tha t looks much lik e the tr eatment but lacks the ac tive ingr edient 
or element thought to be r esponsible for the tr eatment’s effectiveness. When participants in a tr eatment 
condition tak e a pill, f or e xample, then those in a plac ebo c ontrol c ondition w ould tak e an iden tical-
looking pill tha t lacks the ac tive ingredient in the tr eatment (a “sugar pill”). I n research on psy chotherapy 
effectiveness, the placebo might involve going to a psychotherapist and talking in an unstructured way about 
one’s problems. The idea is that if participants in both the treatment and the placebo control groups expect 
to improve, then any improvement in the treatment group over and above that in the placebo control group 
must have been caused by the tr eatment and not b y participants’ expectations. This difference is what is 
shown by a comparison of the two outer bars in Figure 5.4. 
Of course, the principle o f informed consent requires that participants be told tha t they will be assigne d 
to ei ther a tr eatment or a plac ebo c ontrol c ondition—even thoug h the y c annot be told which un til the 
experiment ends. In many cases the participants who had been in the control condition are then offered an 
opportunity to have the real treatment. An alternative approach is to use a wait-list control condition, in 
which participants are told that they will receive the treatment but must w ait until the participants in the 
treatment condition have already received it. This disclosure allows researchers to c ompare participants 
who have received the treatment with participants who are not currently receiving it but who still expect to 
improve (eventually). A final solution to the pr oblem of placebo effects is to leave out the control condition 
completely and c ompare any new treatment with the best a vailable alternative treatment. For example, a 
new treatment for simple phobia could be compared with standard exposure therapy. Because participants 
in both c onditions r eceive a tr eatment, their e xpectations about impr ovement should be similar . This 
approach also makes sense be cause once there is an ef fective treatment, the interesting question about a 
new treatment is not simply “Does it work?” but “Does it work better than what is already available? 
 
The Powerful Placebo 
Many people are not surprised that placebos can have a positive effect on disorders that seem fundamentally 
psychological, including depression, anxiety, and insomnia. However, placebos can also have a positive effect on 
disorders that most people think of as fundamentally physiological. These include asthma, ulcers, and warts 
(Shapiro & Shapiro, 1999)3. There is even evidence that placebo surgery—also called “sham surgery”—can be as 
effective as actual surgery. 
Medical researcher J. Bruce Moseley and his colleagues conducted a study on the effectiveness of two 
arthroscopic surgery procedures for osteoarthritis of the knee (Moseley et al., 2002)4. The control participants 
in this study were prepped for surgery, received a tranquilizer, and even received three small incisions in their 
knees. But they did not receive the actual arthroscopic surgical procedure. Note that the IRB would have 
carefully considered the use of deception in this case and judged that the benefits of using it outweighed the 
risks and that there was no other way to answer the research question (about the effectiveness of a placebo 
procedure) without it. The surprising result was that all participants improved in terms of both knee pain and 
Experiment Basics  |  115function, and the sham surgery group improved just as much as the treatment groups. According to the 
researchers, “This study provides strong evidence that arthroscopic lavage with or without débridement [the 
surgical procedures used] is not better than and appears to be equivalent to a placebo procedure in improving 
knee pain and self-reported function” (p. 85). 
Notes 
1. Knecht, S., Dräger, B., Deppe, M., Bobe, L., Lohmann, H., Flöel, A., . . . Henningsen, H. (2000). Handedness and 
hemispheric language dominance in healthy humans. Brain: A Journal of Neurology, 123(12), 2512-2518. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/123.12.2512 
2. Price, D. D., Finniss, D. G., & Benedetti, F. (2008). A comprehensive review of the placebo effect: Recent advances and 
current thought. Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 565–590. 
3. Shapiro, A. K., & Shapiro, E. (1999). The powerful placebo: From ancient priest to modern physician. Baltimore, MD: 
Johns Hopkins University Press. 
4. Moseley, J. B., O’Malley, K., Petersen, N. J., Menke, T. J., Brody, B. A., Kuykendall, D. H., … Wray, N. P. (2002). A controlled 
trial of arthroscopic surgery for osteoarthritis of the knee. The New England Journal of Medicine, 347, 81–88. 
116  |  Experiment Basics24.  Experimental Design 
Learning Objectives 
1. Explain the difference between between-subjects and within-subjects experiments, list some of the pros 
and cons of each approach, and decide which approach to use to answer a particular research question. 
2. Define random assignment, distinguish it from random sampling, explain its purpose in experimental 
research, and use some simple strategies to implement it 
3. Define several types of carryover effect, give examples of each, and explain how counterbalancing helps 
to deal with them. 
 
In this se ction, we look a t some dif ferent ways to design an e xperiment. The primar y distinction we will 
make is be tween approaches in which e ach participant experiences one le vel of the independen t variable 
and approaches in which each participant experiences all levels of the independent variable. The former are 
called between-subjects experiments and the latter are called within-subjects experiments. 
Between-Subjects Experiments 
In a  between-subjects experiment, e ach par ticipant is teste d in onl y one c ondition. F or e xample, a 
researcher with a sample o f 100 university students might assign half o f them to wri te about a tr aumatic 
event and the other half write about a neutral event. Or a researcher with a sample of 60 people with severe 
agoraphobia (fear of open spac es) mig ht assign 20 o f them to r eceive each of three different treatments 
for that disorder. It is essential in a be tween-subjects experiment that the researcher assigns par ticipants 
to conditions so tha t the dif ferent groups are, on average, highly similar to e ach other. Those in a tr auma 
condition and a neutral condition, for example, should include a similar proportion of men and women, and 
they should have similar average IQs, similar average levels of motivation, similar average numbers of health 
problems, and so on. This matching is a matter of controlling these extraneous participant variables across 
conditions so that they do not become confounding variables. 
Random Assignment 
The primary way that researchers accomplish this kind of control of extraneous variables across conditions 
is called random assignment, which means using a random process to decide which participants are tested 
Experimental Design  |  117in which c onditions. Do not c onfuse r andom assignmen t wi th r andom sampling. Random sampling is a 
method for selecting a sample fr om a popula tion, and i t is r arely used in psy chological research. Random 
assignment is a me thod f or assigning par ticipants in a sample to the dif ferent c onditions, and i t is an 
important element of all experimental research in psychology and other fields too. 
In its strictest sense, random assignment should meet two criteria. One is that each participant has an equal 
chance of being assigned to each condition (e.g., a 50% chance of being assigned to each of two conditions). 
The second is that each participant is assigned to a condition independently of other participants. Thus one 
way to assign par ticipants to t wo conditions would be to flip a c oin for each one. I f the c oin lands he ads, 
the participant is assigned to Condition A, and if it lands tails, the participant is assigned to Condition B. For 
three conditions, one could use a computer to generate a random integer from 1 to 3 for each participant. If 
the integer is 1, the participant is assigned to Condition A; if it is 2, the participant is assigned to Condition 
B; and if i t is 3, the par ticipant is assigne d to Condi tion C. I n practice, a full se quence of conditions—one 
for e ach par ticipant e xpected to be in the e xperiment—is usuall y cr eated ahe ad o f time, and e ach ne w 
participant is assigne d to the ne xt condition in the se quence as the y are tested. W hen the pr ocedure is 
computerized, the computer program often handles the random assignment. 
One problem with coin flipping and other strict procedures for random assignment is that they are likely to 
result in unequal sample sizes in the different conditions. Unequal sample sizes are generally not a serious 
problem, and you should never throw away data you have already collected to achieve equal sample sizes. 
However, f or a fix ed number o f par ticipants, i t is sta tistically most ef ficient to divide them in to e qual-
sized groups. It is standar d practice, therefore, to use a kind o f modified random assignment that keeps 
the number o f participants in e ach group as similar as possi ble. One appr oach is block randomization. In 
block randomization, all the c onditions occur once in the se quence before any of them is r epeated. Then 
they all oc cur again bef ore an y o f them is r epeated again. W ithin e ach o f these “blocks, ” the c onditions 
occur in a r andom order. Again, the se quence of conditions is usuall y generated before any par ticipants 
are teste d, and e ach ne w par ticipant is assigne d to the ne xt c ondition in the se quence. Table 5.2  shows 
such a se quence f or assigning nine par ticipants to thr ee c onditions. The R esearch Randomiz er w ebsite 
(http://www.randomizer.org) will generate block randomization sequences for any number of participants 
and conditions. Again, when the procedure is computerized, the computer program often handles the block 
randomization. 
 
118  |  Experimental DesignTable 5.2 Block 
Randomization Sequence 
for Assigning Nine 
Participants to Three 
Conditions 
Participant Condition 
1 A 
2 C 
3 B 
4 B 
5 C 
6 A 
7 C 
8 B 
9 A 
 
Random assignment is not guaranteed to control all extraneous variables across conditions. The process is 
random, so it is always possible that just by chance, the participants in one condition might turn out to be 
substantially older, less tired, more motivated, or less depressed on average than the participants in another 
condition. However, there are some reasons that this possibility is not a major concern. One is that random 
assignment works better than one might expect, especially for large samples. Another is that the inferential 
statistics that researchers use to de cide whether a dif ference between groups reflects a dif ference in the 
population tak es the “falli bility” o f r andom assignmen t in to ac count. Y et another r eason is tha t e ven if 
random assignment does r esult in a c onfounding variable and ther efore produces misleading results, this 
confound is likely to be detected when the experiment is replicated. The upshot is that random assignment 
to conditions—although not infalli ble in terms o f controlling extraneous variables—is always considered a 
strength of a research design. 
Matched Groups 
An alternative to simple r andom assignment of participants to c onditions is the use o f a matched-groups 
design. Using this design, par ticipants in the v arious conditions are matched on the dependen t variable 
or on some extraneous variable(s) prior the manipulation of the independent variable. This guarantees that 
these v ariables will not be c onfounded acr oss the e xperimental c onditions. F or instanc e, if w e w ant to 
determine whe ther e xpressive wri ting af fects pe ople’s he alth then w e c ould star t b y me asuring v arious 
health-related v ariables in our pr ospective r esearch par ticipants. W e c ould then use tha t inf ormation 
to r ank-order par ticipants ac cording to ho w he althy or unhe althy the y ar e. N ext, the t wo he althiest 
participants would be randomly assigned to complete different conditions (one would be randomly assigned 
to the traumatic experiences writing condition and the other to the neutral writing condition). The next two 
healthiest participants would then be r andomly assigned to complete different conditions, and so on un til 
Experimental Design  |  119the two least healthy participants. This method would ensure that participants in the traumatic experiences 
writing condition are matched to par ticipants in the neutr al wri ting condition wi th respect to he alth at 
the beginning of the study. If at the end o f the experiment, a difference in health was detected across the 
two c onditions, then w e w ould kno w tha t i t is due to the wri ting manipula tion and not to pr e-existing 
differences in health. 
Within-Subjects Experiments 
In a within-subjects experiment, each participant is teste d under all c onditions. Consider an e xperiment 
on the effect of a defendant’s physical attractiveness on judgments of his guilt. Again, in a between-subjects 
experiment, one group of participants would be shown an attractive defendant and asked to judge his guilt, 
and another group of participants would be shown an unattractive defendant and asked to judge his guilt. 
In a within-subjects experiment, however, the same gr oup of participants would judge the guilt o f both an 
attractive and an unattractive defendant. 
The primar y ad vantage o f this appr oach is tha t i t pr ovides maximum c ontrol o f e xtraneous par ticipant 
variables. Participants in all c onditions have the same me an IQ, same socioeconomic status, same number 
of siblings, and so on—be cause they are the v ery same pe ople. Within-subjects experiments also mak e it 
possible to use sta tistical procedures that remove the ef fect of these e xtraneous participant variables on 
the dependent variable and therefore make the data less “noisy” and the effect of the independent variable 
easier to detect. We will look more closely at this idea later in the book.  However, not all experiments can 
use a within-subjects design nor would it be desirable to do so. 
Carryover Effects and Counterbalancing 
The primar y disad vantage o f wi thin-subjects designs is tha t the y c an r esult in or der ef fects. An order 
effect occurs when participants’ responses in the various conditions are affected by the order of conditions 
to which the y were exposed. One t ype of order effect is a c arryover effect. A carryover effect is an ef fect 
of being teste d in one c ondition on par ticipants’ beha vior in la ter c onditions. One t ype o f c arryover 
effect is a  practice effect, where participants perform a task be tter in la ter conditions because they have 
had a chanc e to pr actice i t. Another t ype is a fatigue effect, wher e par ticipants perf orm a task w orse 
in la ter c onditions be cause the y be come tir ed or bor ed. Being teste d in one c ondition c an also chang e 
how par ticipants per ceive stimuli or in terpret their task in la ter c onditions. This  type o f ef fect is called 
a context effect ( or con trast eff ect). F or e xample, an a verage-looking def endant mig ht be judg ed mor e 
harshly when par ticipants ha ve just judg ed an a ttractive def endant than when the y ha ve just judg ed an 
unattractive def endant. W ithin-subjects e xperiments also mak e i t e asier f or par ticipants to guess the 
hypothesis. For example, a participant who is asked to judge the guilt of an attractive defendant and then is 
asked to judge the guilt of an unattractive defendant is likely to guess that the hypothesis is that defendant 
attractiveness affects judgments of guilt. This knowledge could lead the participant to judge the unattractive 
120  |  Experimental Designdefendant more harshly because he thinks this is wha t he is e xpected to do. Or i t could make participants 
judge the two defendants similarly in an effort to be “fair.” 
Carryover effects can be interesting in their own right. (Does the attractiveness of one person depend on the 
attractiveness of other people that we have seen recently?) But when they are not the focus of the research, 
carryover effects can be problematic. Imagine, for example, that participants judge the guilt of an attractive 
defendant and then judg e the guilt o f an una ttractive defendant. If they judge the una ttractive defendant 
more harshly, this mig ht be be cause of his una ttractiveness. But i t could be inste ad that they judge him 
more harshly because they are becoming bored or tir ed. In other w ords, the or der of the c onditions is a 
confounding variable. The attractive condition is always the first c ondition and the una ttractive condition 
the second. Thus any difference between the conditions in terms of the dependent variable could be caused 
by the order of the conditions and not the independent variable itself. 
There is a solution to the pr oblem o f or der ef fects, ho wever, tha t c an be use d in man y si tuations. I t 
is counterbalancing, which me ans testing dif ferent par ticipants in dif ferent or ders. The best me thod o f 
counterbalancing is complete counterbalancing in which an e qual number o f participants complete each 
possible or der o f c onditions. For e xample, half o f the par ticipants w ould be teste d in the a ttractive 
defendant condition followed by the una ttractive defendant condition, and others half w ould be teste d in 
the unattractive condition followed by the a ttractive condition. With three conditions, there would be six 
different orders (ABC, ACB, BAC, BCA, CAB, and CBA), so some par ticipants would be tested in each of the 
six orders. With four conditions, there would be 24 different orders; with five conditions there would be 120 
possible orders. With counterbalancing, participants are assigned to orders randomly, using the techniques 
we have already discussed. Thus, r andom assignment plays an impor tant role in wi thin-subjects designs 
just as in be tween-subjects designs. Here, instead of randomly assigning to c onditions, they are randomly 
assigned to different orders of conditions. In fact, it can safely be said that if a study does not involve random 
assignment in one form or another, it is not an experiment. 
A more efficient way of counterbalancing is through a Latin square design which randomizes through having 
equal r ows and c olumns. F or e xample, if y ou ha ve f our tr eatments, y ou must ha ve f our v ersions. Lik e a 
Sudoku puzzle, no treatment can repeat in a row or column. For four versions of four treatments, the Latin 
square design would look like: 
 
A B C D 
B C D A 
C D A B 
D A B C 
 
You c an se e in the diagr am abo ve tha t the squar e has be en c onstructed to ensur e tha t e ach c ondition 
appears at each ordinal position (A appears first once, second once, third once, and fourth once) and each 
condition pr ecedes and f ollows e ach other c ondition one time. A L atin squar e f or an e xperiment wi th 
Experimental Design  |  1216 c onditions w ould b y 6 x 6 in dimension, one f or an e xperiment wi th 8 c onditions w ould be 8 x 8 in 
dimension, and so on. So while complete counterbalancing of 6 conditions would require 720 orders, a Latin 
square would only require 6 orders. 
Finally, when the number of conditions is large experiments can use random counterbalancing in which the 
order of the c onditions is r andomly determined for each participant. Using this te chnique every possible 
order of conditions is determined and then one o f these orders is randomly selected for each participant. 
This is not as powerful a technique as complete counterbalancing or partial counterbalancing using a Latin 
squares design. Use of random counterbalancing will result in more random error, but if or der effects are 
likely to be small and the number of conditions is large, this is an option available to researchers. 
There are two ways to think about wha t counterbalancing accomplishes. One is tha t it controls the or der 
of conditions so that it is no longer a confounding variable. Instead of the attractive condition always being 
first and the una ttractive c ondition al ways being se cond, the a ttractive c ondition c omes first f or some 
participants and se cond for others. Lik ewise, the una ttractive condition comes first f or some par ticipants 
and second for others. Thus an y overall difference in the dependen t variable between the t wo conditions 
cannot have been caused by the or der of conditions. A se cond way to think about wha t counterbalancing 
accomplishes is that if there are carryover effects, it makes it possible to detect them. One can analyze the 
data separately for each order to see whether it had an effect. 
 
When 9 Is “Larger” Than 221 
Researcher Michael Birnbaum has argued that the lack of context provided by between-subjects designs is 
often a bigger problem than the context effects created by within-subjects designs. To demonstrate this 
problem, he asked participants to rate two numbers on how large they were on a scale of 1-to-10 where 1 was 
“very very small” and 10 was “very very large”.  One group of participants were asked to rate the number 9 and 
another group was asked to rate the number 221 (Birnbaum, 1999)1. Participants in this between-subjects design 
gave the number 9 a mean rating of 5.13 and the number 221 a mean rating of 3.10. In other words, they rated 9 
as larger than 221! According to Birnbaum, this difference is because participants spontaneously compared 9 
with other one-digit numbers (in which case it is relatively large) and compared 221 with other three-digit 
numbers (in which case it is relatively small). 
Simultaneous Within-Subjects Designs 
So far , w e ha ve discusse d an appr oach to wi thin-subjects designs in which par ticipants ar e teste d in 
one condition at a time. Ther e is another appr oach, however, that is o ften used when par ticipants make 
multiple responses in each condition. Imagine, for example, that participants judge the guilt of 10 attractive 
122  |  Experimental Designdefendants and 10 unattractive defendants. Instead of having people make judgments about all 10 defendants 
of one type followed by all 10 defendants of the other type, the researcher could present all 20 defendants 
in a sequence that mixed the two types. The researcher could then compute each participant’s mean rating 
for each type of defendant. Or imag ine an experiment designed to see whether people with social anxiety 
disorder remember negative adjectives (e.g., “stupid,” “incompetent”) better than positive ones (e.g., “happy,” 
“productive”). The r esearcher could have participants study a sing le list tha t includes both kinds o f words 
and then have them try to recall as many words as possible. The researcher could then count the number of 
each type of word that was recalled. 
Between-Subjects or Within-Subjects? 
Almost every experiment can be c onducted using ei ther a be tween-subjects design or a wi thin-subjects 
design. This possi bility means that researchers must choose be tween the t wo approaches based on their 
relative merits for the particular situation. 
Between-subjects experiments have the advantage of being conceptually simpler and requiring less testing 
time per par ticipant. The y also a void c arryover ef fects wi thout the ne ed f or c ounterbalancing. W ithin-
subjects experiments have the ad vantage of controlling extraneous participant variables, which g enerally 
reduces noise in the da ta and mak es i t easier to de tect any ef fect of the independen t variable upon the 
dependent v ariable. W ithin-subjects e xperiments also r equire f ewer par ticipants than be tween-subjects 
experiments to detect an effect of the same size. 
A good rule o f thumb, then, is tha t if i t is possi ble to c onduct a wi thin-subjects experiment (with proper 
counterbalancing) in the time tha t is a vailable per par ticipant—and y ou have no serious c oncerns about 
carryover ef fects—this design is pr obably the best option. I f a wi thin-subjects design w ould be dif ficult 
or impossi ble to c arry out, then y ou should c onsider a be tween-subjects design inste ad. For example, if 
you were testing par ticipants in a doc tor’s waiting room or shoppers in line a t a gr ocery store, you might 
not have enoug h time to test e ach par ticipant in all c onditions and ther efore would opt f or a be tween-
subjects design. Or imag ine you were trying to r educe people’s level of prejudice by having them in teract 
with someone of another race. A within-subjects design with counterbalancing would require testing some 
participants in the treatment condition first and then in a control condition. But if the treatment works and 
reduces people’s level of prejudice, then they would no longer be suitable for testing in the control condition. 
This dif ficulty is true f or man y designs tha t involve a tr eatment me ant to pr oduce long-term chang e in 
participants’ behavior (e.g., studies testing the ef fectiveness of psychotherapy). Clearly, a between-subjects 
design would be necessary here. 
Remember also tha t using one t ype of design does not pr eclude using the other t ype in a dif ferent study. 
There is no r eason that a r esearcher could not use both a be tween-subjects design and a wi thin-subjects 
design to answer the same research question. In fact, professional researchers often take exactly this type 
of mixed methods approach. 
Experimental Design  |  123Notes 
1. Birnbaum, M.H. (1999). How to show that 9>221: Collect judgments in a between-subjects design. Psychological 
Methods, 4(3), 243-249. 
124  |  Experimental Design25.  Experimentation and Validity 
Learning Objectives 
1. Explain what internal validity is and why experiments are considered to be high in internal validity. 
2. Explain what external validity is and evaluate studies in terms of their external validity. 
3. Explain the concepts of construct and statistical validity. 
Four Big Validities 
When w e r ead about psy chology e xperiments wi th a cri tical vie w, one question to ask is “is this stud y 
valid (accurate)?” However, that question is not as straightforward as it seems because, in psychology, there 
are many different kinds o f validities. Researchers have focused on f our validities to help assess whe ther 
an experiment is sound (Judd & K enny, 1981; M orling, 2014)12: internal validity, external validity, construct 
validity, and statistical validity. We will explore each validity in depth. 
Internal Validity 
Two v ariables being sta tistically r elated does not ne cessarily me an tha t one c auses the other . I n y our 
psychology e ducation, y ou ha ve pr obably he ard the term, “ Correlation does not impl y c ausation.” F or 
example, if it were the case that people who exercise regularly are happier than people who do not exercise 
regularly, this implication would not necessarily mean that exercising increases people’s happiness. It could 
mean instead that greater happiness causes people to exercise or that something like better physical health 
causes people to exercise and be happier. 
The purpose o f an e xperiment, however, is to sho w that t wo variables are statistically related and to do 
so in a w ay that supports the c onclusion that the independen t variable caused any observed differences 
in the dependen t variable. The log ic is base d on this assumption: I f the r esearcher creates t wo or mor e 
highly similar c onditions and then manipula tes the independen t v ariable to pr oduce just  one difference 
between them, then any later difference between the conditions must have been caused by the independent 
variable. For example, because the only difference between Darley and Latané’s conditions was the number 
of students that participants believed to be in volved in the discussion, this dif ference in belief must ha ve 
been responsible for differences in helping between the conditions. 
An empirical study is said to be high in internal validity if the way it was conducted supports the conclusion 
Experimentation and Validity  |  125that the independent variable caused any observed differences in the dependent variable. Thus experiments 
are high in internal validity because the way they are conducted—with the manipulation of the independent 
variable and the control of extraneous variables (such as through the use of random assignment to minimize 
confounds)—provides str ong suppor t f or c ausal c onclusions. I n c ontrast, non-e xperimental r esearch 
designs ( e.g., c orrelational designs ), in which v ariables ar e me asured but ar e not manipula ted b y an 
experimenter, are low in internal validity. 
External Validity 
At the same time, the way that experiments are conducted sometimes leads to a different kind of criticism. 
Specifically, the need to manipulate the independent variable and control extraneous variables means that 
experiments are often conducted under conditions that seem artificial (Bauman, McGraw, Bartels, & Warren, 
2014)3. In man y psy chology e xperiments, the par ticipants ar e all under graduate studen ts and c ome to a 
classroom or labor atory to fill out a series o f paper-and-pencil questionnaires or to perf orm a c arefully 
designed computerized task. Consider, for example, an experiment in which researcher Barbara Fredrickson 
and her colleagues had undergraduate students come to a laboratory on campus and complete a math test 
while wearing a swimsui t (Fredrickson, Roberts, Noll, Quinn, & Tw enge, 1998)4. At first, this manipula tion 
might seem silly. When will under graduate students ever have to c omplete math tests in their swimsui ts 
outside of this experiment? 
The issue w e are confronting is tha t of external validity. An empiric al study is hig h in external validity if 
the way it was conducted supports generalizing the results to people and situations beyond those actually 
studied. As a g eneral rule, studies ar e hig her in e xternal validity when the par ticipants and the si tuation 
studied are similar to those tha t the r esearchers want to g eneralize to and par ticipants encounter every 
day, often described as mundane realism. Imagine, for example, that a gr oup of researchers is in terested 
in how shoppers in lar ge grocery stores are affected by whether breakfast cereal is packag ed in yellow or 
purple boxes. Their study would be high in external validity and have high mundane realism if they studied 
the decisions of ordinary people doing their weekly shopping in a real grocery store. If the shoppers bought 
much more cereal in purple bo xes, the r esearchers would be fair ly confident that this incr ease would be 
true for other shoppers in other stor es. Their stud y would be r elatively low in e xternal validity, however, 
if the y studie d a sample o f under graduate studen ts in a labor atory a t a sele ctive univ ersity who mer ely 
judged the appeal of various colors presented on a c omputer screen; however, this study would have high 
psychological realism where the same mental process is used in both the laboratory and in the real world. 
If the students judged purple to be more appealing than yellow, the researchers would not be very confident 
that this preference is relevant to grocery shoppers’ cereal-buying decisions because of low external validity 
but they could be confident that the visual processing of colors has high psychological realism. 
We should be c areful, however, not to dr aw the blank et conclusion that experiments are low in e xternal 
validity. One r eason is tha t e xperiments ne ed not se em ar tificial. Consider tha t D arley and L atané’s 
experiment pr ovided a r easonably g ood simula tion o f a r eal emer gency si tuation. Or c onsider field 
experiments that are conducted entirely outside the labor atory. In one such e xperiment, Robert Cialdini 
and his colleagues studied whether hotel guests choose to r euse their towels for a second day as opposed 
126  |  Experimentation and Validityto ha ving them w ashed as a w ay o f c onserving w ater and ener gy ( Cialdini, 2005) 5. These r esearchers 
manipulated the messag e on a c ard lef t in a lar ge sample o f hotel r ooms. One v ersion o f the messag e 
emphasized sho wing r espect f or the en vironment, another emphasiz ed tha t the hotel w ould dona te a 
portion of their savings to an en vironmental cause, and a thir d emphasized that most hotel guests choose 
to reuse their towels. The result was that guests who r eceived the message that most hotel guests choose 
to reuse their towels, reused their own towels substantially more often than guests r eceiving either of the 
other two messages. Given the way they conducted their study, it seems very likely that their result would 
hold true for other guests in other hotels. 
A second reason not to draw the blanket conclusion that experiments are low in external validity is that they 
are often conducted to learn about psychological processes that are likely to operate in a variety of people 
and situations. Let us return to the experiment by Fredrickson and colleagues. They found that the women 
in their study, but not the men, performed worse on the math test when they were wearing swimsuits. They 
argued that this gender difference was due to w omen’s greater tendency to objectify themselves—to think 
about themsel ves fr om the perspe ctive o f an outside obser ver—which div erts their a ttention away fr om 
other tasks. They argued, furthermore, that this process of self-objectification and its effect on attention is 
likely to operate in a variety of women and situations—even if none of them ever finds herself taking a math 
test in her swimsuit. 
Construct Validity 
In addition to the generalizability of the results of an experiment, another element to scrutinize in a study is 
the quality of the experiment’s manipulations or the construct validity. The research question that Darley 
and Latané started with is “does helping behavior become diffused?” They hypothesized that participants in 
a lab would be less likely to help when they believed there were more potential helpers besides themselves. 
This conversion from research question to e xperiment design is c alled operationalization (see Chapter 4 
for more information about the operational definition). Darley and Latané operationalized the independent 
variable of diffusion of responsibility by increasing the number of potential helpers. In evaluating this design, 
we would say that the construct validity was very high because the experiment’s manipulations very clearly 
speak to the r esearch question; ther e was a crisis, a w ay f or the par ticipant to help, and incr easing the 
number of other students involved in the discussion, they provided a way to test diffusion. 
What if the number o f conditions in D arley and L atané’s study changed? Consider if ther e were only two 
conditions: one studen t involved in the discussion or t wo. Even though we may see a de crease in helping 
by adding another person, it may not be a clear demonstration of diffusion of responsibility, just merely the 
presence of others. We might think i t was a f orm of Bandura’s concept of social inhibition. The construct 
validity w ould be lo wer. H owever, had ther e be en fiv e c onditions, per haps w e w ould se e the de crease 
continue with more people in the discussion or per haps it would plateau after a certain number of people. 
In that situation, we may develop a mor e nuanced understanding o f the phenomenon. B ut by adding still 
more conditions, the construct validity may not get higher. When designing your own experiment, consider 
how well the research question is operationalized your study. 
Experimentation and Validity  |  127Statistical Validity 
Statistical validity concerns the proper statistical treatment of data and the soundness of the researchers’ 
statistical c onclusions. Ther e ar e man y dif ferent t ypes o f inf erential sta tistics tests ( e.g., t-tests, AN OVA, 
regression, correlation) and sta tistical validity concerns the use o f the pr oper type of test to anal yze the 
data. W hen c onsidering the pr oper t ype o f test, r esearchers must c onsider the sc ale o f me asure their 
dependent variable was measured on and the design of their study. Further, many inferential statistics tests 
carry certain assumptions (e.g., the data are normally distributed) and statistical validity is threatened when 
these assumptions are not met but the statistics are used nonetheless. 
One common critique of experiments is tha t a stud y did not ha ve enoug h participants. The main r eason 
for this criticism is that it is difficult to generalize about a population from a small sample. At the outset, it 
seems as thoug h this critique is about e xternal validity but there are studies where small sample siz es are 
not a problem (subsequent chapters will discuss ho w small samples, e ven of only one person, ar e still very 
illuminating for psychological research). Therefore, small sample siz es are actually a cri tique of statistical 
validity. The sta tistical v alidity spe aks to whe ther the sta tistics c onducted in the stud y ar e sound and 
support the conclusions that are made. 
The proper statistical analysis should be c onducted on the da ta to de termine whether the dif ference or 
relationship that was predicted was indeed found. Interestingly, the likelihood of detecting an effect of the 
independent variable on the dependen t variable depends on not just whe ther a r elationship really exists 
between these v ariables, but also the number o f conditions and the siz e of the sample. This is wh y i t is 
important to c onduct a power analysis when designing a stud y, which is a c alculation that informs you of 
the number of participants you need to recruit to detect an effect of a specific size. 
Prioritizing Validities 
These four big validities–internal, external, construct, and statistical–are useful to keep in mind when both 
reading about other e xperiments and designing y our own. However, researchers must prioritize and often 
it is not possi ble to ha ve hig h v alidity in all f our ar eas. I n Cialdini’ s stud y on to wel usag e in hotels, the 
external validity was high but the statistical validity was more modest. This discrepancy does not invalidate 
the study but it shows where there may be room for improvement for future follow-up studies (Goldstein, 
Cialdini, & Griskevicius, 2008)6. Morling (2014) points out that many psychology studies have high internal 
and construct validity but sometimes sacrifice external validity. 
Notes 
1. Judd, C.M. & Kenny, D.A. (1981). Estimating the effects of social interventions. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University 
Press. 
128  |  Experimentation and Validity2. Morling, B. (2014, April). Teach your students to be better consumers. APS Observer. Retrieved from 
http://www.psychologicalscience.org/index.php/publications/observer/2014/april-14/teach-your-students-to-be-
better-consumers.html 
3. Bauman, C.W., McGraw, A.P., Bartels, D.M., & Warren, C. (2014). Revisiting external validity: Concerns about trolley 
problems and other sacrificial dilemmas in moral psychology. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 8/9, 
536-554. 
4. Fredrickson, B. L., Roberts, T.-A., Noll, S. M., Quinn, D. M., & Twenge, J. M. (1998). The swimsuit becomes you: Sex 
differences in self-objectification, restrained eating, and math performance. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 75, 269–284. 
5. Cialdini, R. (2005, April). Don’t throw in the towel: Use social influence research. APS Observer. Retrieved from 
http://www.psychologicalscience.org/index.php/publications/observer/2005/april-05/dont-throw-in-the-towel-
use-social-influence-research.html 
6. Goldstein, N. J., Cialdini, R. B., & Griskevicius, V. (2008). A room with a viewpoint: Using social norms to motivate 
environmental conservation in hotels. Journal of Consumer Research, 35, 472–482. 
Experimentation and Validity  |  12926.  Practical Considerations 
Learning Objectives 
1. Describe several strategies for recruiting participants for an experiment. 
2. Explain why it is important to standardize the procedure of an experiment and several ways to do this. 
3. Explain what pilot testing is and why it is important. 
 
The information presented so far in this chapter is enough to design a basic experiment. When it comes time 
to conduct that experiment, however, several additional practical issues arise. I n this section, we consider 
some of these issues and ho w to de al wi th them. Much o f this inf ormation applies to non-e xperimental 
studies as well as experimental ones. 
Recruiting Participants 
Of c ourse, at the star t o f an y r esearch pr oject, you should be thinking about ho w y ou will obtain y our 
participants. Unless y ou have access to pe ople with schizophrenia or inc arcerated juvenile offenders, for 
example, then there is no point designing a study that focuses on these populations. But even if you plan to 
use a convenience sample, you will have to recruit participants for your study. 
There ar e se veral appr oaches to r ecruiting par ticipants. One is to use par ticipants fr om a 
formal subject pool—an established group of people who ha ve agreed to be c ontacted about par ticipating 
in research studies. F or example, at many colleges and univ ersities, there is a subje ct pool c onsisting of 
students enrolled in introductory psychology courses who must par ticipate in a certain number of studies 
to me et a c ourse r equirement. R esearchers post descriptions o f their studies and studen ts sign up to 
participate, usually via an online system. P articipants who are not in subject pools can also be recruited by 
posting or publishing advertisements or making personal appeals to groups that represent the population of 
interest. For example, a researcher interested in studying older adults could arrange to speak at a meeting 
of the residents at a retirement community to explain the study and ask for volunteers. 
 
130  |  Practical Considerations“Study” Retrieved from http://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/
study.png (CC-BY-NC 2.5) 
The Volunteer Subject 
Even if the participants in a study receive compensation in the form of course credit, a small amount of money, 
or a chance at being treated for a psychological problem, they are still essentially volunteers. This is worth 
considering because people who volunteer to participate in psychological research have been shown to differ 
in predictable ways from those who do not volunteer. Specifically, there is good evidence that on average, 
volunteers have the following characteristics compared with non-volunteers (Rosenthal & Rosnow, 1976)1: 
• They are more interested in the topic of the research. 
• They are more educated. 
• They have a greater need for approval. 
• They have higher IQ. 
• They are more sociable. 
• They are higher in social class. 
This difference can be an issue of external validity if there is a reason to believe that participants with these 
Practical Considerations  |  131characteristics are likely to behave differently than the general population. For example, in testing different 
methods of persuading people, a rational argument might work better on volunteers than it does on the general 
population because of their generally higher educational level and IQ. 
 
In man y field e xperiments, the task is not r ecruiting par ticipants but sele cting them. F or e xample, 
researchers Nicolas Guéguen and Marie-Agnès de Gail c onducted a field experiment on the effect of being 
smiled at on helping, in which the participants were shoppers at a supermarket. A confederate walking down 
a stairway gazed directly at a shopper w alking up the stair way and ei ther smiled or did not smile. Shor tly 
afterward, the shopper enc ountered another c onfederate, who dr opped some c omputer diskettes on the 
ground. The dependen t v ariable w as whe ther or not the shopper stoppe d to help pick up the disk ettes 
(Guéguen & de Gail, 2003)2. There are two aspects of this study that are worth addressing here. First, notice 
that these par ticipants were not “ recruited,” which me ans that the IRB w ould have taken care to ensur e 
that dispensing with informed consent in this case was acceptable (e.g., the situation would not have been 
expected to c ause any harm and the stud y was conducted in the c ontext of people’s ordinary activities). 
Second, even though informed consent was not ne cessary, the researchers still had to sele ct participants 
from among all the shoppers taking the stairs that day. It is extremely important that this kind of selection be 
done according to a well-defined set of rules that are established before the data collection begins and can 
be explained clearly afterward. In this case, with each trip down the stairs, the c onfederate was instructed 
to gaze at the first person he enc ountered who appeared to be be tween the ages of 20 and 50 . Only if the 
person gazed back did they become a participant in the study. The point of having a well-defined selection 
rule is to a void bias in the sele ction o f par ticipants. For e xample, if the c onfederate w as fr ee to choose 
which shoppers he would gaze at, he might choose friendly-looking shoppers when he was set to smile and 
unfriendly-looking ones when he w as not se t to smile. As w e will se e shortly, such biases c an be en tirely 
unintentional. 
Standardizing the Procedure 
It is surprising ly e asy to in troduce e xtraneous v ariables during the pr ocedure. F or e xample, the same 
experimenter mig ht g ive clear instructions to one par ticipant but v ague instructions to another . Or one 
experimenter might greet participants warmly while another bar ely makes eye contact with them. To the 
extent that such v ariables affect participants’ behavior, they add noise to the da ta and mak e the ef fect of 
the independent variable more difficult to detect. If they vary systematically across conditions, they become 
confounding variables and pr ovide alternative explanations for the r esults. For example, if par ticipants in 
a treatment group are tested by a warm and friendly experimenter and participants in a c ontrol group are 
tested by a cold and unfriendly one, then wha t appears to be an ef fect of the treatment might actually be 
an effect of experimenter demeanor. When there are multiple experimenters, the possibility of introducing 
extraneous variables is even greater, but is often necessary for practical reasons. 
132  |  Practical Considerations 
Experimenter’s Sex as an Extraneous Variable 
It is well known that whether research participants are male or female can affect the results of a study. But 
what about whether the experimenter is male or female? There is plenty of evidence that this matters too. Male 
and female experimenters have slightly different ways of interacting with their participants, and of course, 
participants also respond differently to male and female experimenters (Rosenthal, 1976)3. 
For example, in a recent study on pain perception, participants immersed their hands in icy water for as long as 
they could (Ibolya, Brake, & Voss, 2004)4. Male participants tolerated the pain longer when the experimenter 
was a woman, and female participants tolerated it longer when the experimenter was a man. 
 
Researcher Robert Rosenthal has spent much o f his c areer showing that this kind o f unintended variation 
in the pr ocedure does, in fac t, af fect par ticipants’ beha vior. F urthermore, one impor tant sour ce o f such 
variation is the e xperimenter’s e xpectations about ho w par ticipants “ should” beha ve in the e xperiment. 
This outc ome is r eferred to as an  experimenter expectancy effect (Rosenthal, 19 76)5. For e xample, if an 
experimenter expects participants in a tr eatment group to perform better on a task than par ticipants in a 
control group, then the y might unintentionally give the tr eatment group participants clearer instructions 
or more encouragement or allo w them mor e time to c omplete the task. I n a striking e xample, Rosenthal 
and K ermit F ode had se veral studen ts in a labor atory c ourse in psy chology tr ain r ats to run thr ough a 
maze. Although the r ats were genetically similar, some o f the studen ts were told tha t they were working 
with “maze-bright” rats that had be en bred to be g ood learners, and other studen ts were told tha t they 
were working with “maze-dull” rats that had been bred to be poor le arners. Sure enough, over five days of 
training, the “maze-bright” rats made more correct responses, made the correct response more quickly, and 
improved more steadily than the “maze-dull” rats (Rosenthal & Fode, 1963)6. Clearly, it had to have been the 
students’ expectations about ho w the r ats would perform that made the dif ference. But how? Some clues 
come from data gathered at the end o f the stud y, which showed that students who e xpected their r ats to 
learn quickly felt more positively about their animals and reported behaving toward them in a more friendly 
manner (e.g., handling them more). 
The way to minimize unintended variation in the procedure is to standardize it as much as possible so that 
it is carried out in the same way for all participants regardless of the condition they are in. Here are several 
ways to do this: 
• Create a written protocol that specifies everything that the experimenters are to do and say from the 
time they greet participants to the time they dismiss them. 
• Create standard instructions that participants read themselves or that are read to them word for word 
by the experimenter. 
• Automate the rest of the procedure as much as possible by using software packages for this purpose or 
Practical Considerations  |  133even simple computer slide shows. 
• Anticipate participants’ questions and either raise and answer them in the instructions or develop 
standard answers for them. 
• Train multiple experimenters on the protocol together and have them practice on each other. 
• Be sure that each experimenter tests participants in all conditions. 
Another g ood pr actice is to arr ange f or the e xperimenters to be “blind” to the r esearch question or to 
the condition in which each participant is tested. The idea is to minimize experimenter expectancy effects 
by minimizing the e xperimenters’ e xpectations. F or e xample, in a drug stud y in which e ach par ticipant 
receives the drug or a plac ebo, it is often the case that neither the participants nor the e xperimenter who 
interacts with the participants knows which condition they have been assigned to complete. Because both 
the participants and the experimenters are blind to the condition, this technique is referred to as a double-
blind study. (A single-blind study is one in which onl y the participant is blind to the c ondition.) Of course, 
there are many times this blinding is not possible. For example, if you are both the investigator and the only 
experimenter, it is not possible for you to remain blind to the research question. Also, in many studies, the 
experimenter must know the condition because they must carry out the procedure in a different way in the 
different conditions. 
 
“Placebo Blocker” retrieved from http://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/placebo_blocker.png (CC-BY-NC 2.5). [Image description] 
 
Record Keeping 
It is essential to keep good records when you conduct an experiment. As discussed earlier, it is typical for 
134  |  Practical Considerationsexperimenters to generate a written sequence of conditions before the study begins and then to test e ach 
new participant in the next condition in the sequence. As you test them, it is a good idea to add to this list 
basic demographic information; the date, time, and place of testing; and the name of the experimenter who 
did the testing. I t is also a g ood idea to have a place for the experimenter to wri te down comments about 
unusual occurrences (e.g., a confused or uncooperative participant) or questions that come up. This kind of 
information can be useful later if you decide to analyze sex differences or effects of different experimenters, 
or if a question arises about a particular participant or testing session. 
Since par ticipants’ identities should be k ept as c onfidential (or anonymous) as possi ble, their names and 
other iden tifying inf ormation should not be include d wi th their da ta. I n or der to iden tify individual 
participants, it can, therefore, be useful to assign an iden tification number to e ach participant as you test 
them. Simply numbering them c onsecutively beginning with 1 is usuall y sufficient. This number c an then 
also be written on any response sheets or questionnaires that participants generate, making it easier to keep 
them together. 
Manipulation Check 
In many experiments, the independent variable is a c onstruct that can only be manipulated indirectly. For 
example, a researcher might try to manipulate participants’ stress levels indirectly by telling some of them 
that they have five minutes to pr epare a shor t speech that they will then ha ve to g ive to an a udience of 
other participants. In such si tuations, researchers often include a manipulation check in their procedure. 
A manipulation check is a separ ate measure of the c onstruct the r esearcher is tr ying to manipula te. The 
purpose o f a manipula tion che ck is to c onfirm tha t the independen t v ariable w as, in fac t, suc cessfully 
manipulated. For example, researchers tr ying to manipula te participants’ stress levels mig ht g ive them a 
paper-and-pencil stress questionnaire or take their blood pressure—perhaps right after the manipulation or 
at the end of the procedure—to verify that they successfully manipulated this variable. 
Manipulation checks are particularly important when the r esults of an e xperiment turn out null. I n cases 
where the r esults sho w no signific ant ef fect o f the manipula tion o f the independen t v ariable on the 
dependent variable, a manipulation check can help the e xperimenter determine whether the null r esult is 
due to a r eal absenc e o f an ef fect o f the independen t v ariable on the dependen t v ariable or if i t is due 
to a pr oblem with the manipula tion of the independen t variable. Imagine, for example, that you exposed 
participants to happ y or sad mo vie music—intending to put them in happ y or sad moods—but y ou found 
that this had no effect on the number of happy or sad childhood events they recalled. This could be because 
being in a happy or sad mood has no ef fect on memories for childhood events. But it could also be that the 
music was ineffective at putting participants in happy or sad moods. A manipula tion check—in this case, a 
measure of participants’ moods—would help resolve this uncertainty. If it showed that you had successfully 
manipulated participants’ moods, then i t would appear that there is indeed no ef fect of mood on memor y 
for childhood events. But if it showed that you did not successfully manipulate participants’ moods, then it 
would appear that you need a more effective manipulation to answer your research question. 
Manipulation che cks ar e usuall y done a t the end o f the pr ocedure to be sur e tha t the ef fect o f the 
Practical Considerations  |  135manipulation laste d thr oughout the en tire pr ocedure and to a void c alling unne cessary a ttention to the 
manipulation (to avoid a demand char acteristic). However, researchers are wise to include a manipula tion 
check in a pilot test o f their e xperiment so tha t the y avoid spending a lot o f time and r esources on an 
experiment that is doomed to fail and inste ad spend that time and energy finding a better manipulation of 
the independent variable. 
Pilot Testing 
It is al ways a g ood ide a to c onduct a  pilot test of y our e xperiment. A pilot test is a small-sc ale stud y 
conducted to make sure that a new procedure works as planned. In a pilot test, you can recruit participants 
formally (e.g., from an established participant pool) or y ou can recruit them informally from among family, 
friends, classmates, and so on. The number o f participants can be small, but i t should be enoug h to g ive 
you confidence that your procedure works as planned. There are several important questions that you can 
answer by conducting a pilot test: 
• Do participants understand the instructions? 
• What kind of misunderstandings do participants have, what kind of mistakes do they make, and what 
kind of questions do they ask? 
• Do participants become bored or frustrated? 
• Is an indirect manipulation effective? (You will need to include a manipulation check.) 
• Can participants guess the research question or hypothesis (are there demand characteristics)? 
• How long does the procedure take? 
• Are computer programs or other automated procedures working properly? 
• Are data being recorded correctly? 
Of course, to answ er some o f these questions y ou will ne ed to obser ve participants carefully during the 
procedure and talk wi th them about i t af terward. P articipants ar e o ften hesi tant to cri ticize a stud y in 
front of the r esearcher, so be sur e they understand tha t their par ticipation is par t of a pilot test and y ou 
are genuinely interested in f eedback that will help y ou improve the pr ocedure. If the pr ocedure works as 
planned, then you can proceed with the actual study. If there are problems to be solved, you can solve them, 
pilot test the new procedure, and continue with this process until you are ready to proceed. 
Image Descriptions 
Placebo blocker image description: A comic of two stick figures talking. 
Person 1: Some researchers are starting to figure out the mechanism behind the placebo effect. We’ve used 
their work to cr eate a ne w drug: A plac ebo effect blocker. Now we just ne ed to run a trial. W e’ll get two 
groups, give them both placebos, then give one the REAL placebo blocker, and the other a…. wait. 
136  |  Practical Considerations[The two people scratch their heads] 
Person 2: My head hurts. 
Person 1: Mine too. Here, want a sugar pill? 
[Return to Placebo blocker Image] 
Media Attributions 
• Study by XKCD CC BY-NC (Attribution NonCommercial) 
• Placebo blocker by XKCD CC BY-NC (Attribution NonCommercial) 
Notes 
1. Rosenthal, R., & Rosnow, R. L. (1976). The volunteer subject. New York, NY: Wiley. 
2. Guéguen, N., & de Gail, Marie-Agnès. (2003). The effect of smiling on helping behavior: Smiling and good Samaritan 
behavior. Communication Reports, 16, 133–140. 
3. Rosenthal, R. (1976). Experimenter effects in behavioral research (enlarged ed.). New York, NY: Wiley. 
4. Ibolya, K., Brake, A., & Voss, U. (2004). The effect of experimenter characteristics on pain reports in women and men. 
Pain, 112, 142–147. 
5. Rosenthal, R. (1976). Experimenter effects in behavioral research (enlarged ed.). New York, NY: Wiley. 
6. Rosenthal, R., & Fode, K. (1963). The effect of experimenter bias on performance of the albino rat. Behavioral Science, 
8, 183-189. 
Practical Considerations  |  13727.  Key Takeaways and Exercises 
Key Takeaways 
• An experiment is a type of empirical study that features the manipulation of an independent variable, the 
measurement of a dependent variable, and control of extraneous variables. 
• An extraneous variable is any variable other than the independent and dependent variables. A confound is 
an extraneous variable that varies systematically with the independent variable. 
• Experimental research on the effectiveness of a treatment requires both a treatment condition and a 
control condition, which can be a no-treatment control condition, a placebo control condition, or a wait-
list control condition. Experimental treatments can also be compared with the best available alternative. 
• Experiments can be conducted using either between-subjects or within-subjects designs. Deciding which 
to use in a particular situation requires careful consideration of the pros and cons of each approach. 
• Random assignment to conditions in between-subjects experiments or counterbalancing of orders of 
conditions in within-subjects experiments is a fundamental element of experimental research. The 
purpose of these techniques is to control extraneous variables so that they do not become confounding 
variables. 
• Studies are high in internal validity to the extent that the way they are conducted supports the 
conclusion that the independent variable caused any observed differences in the dependent variable. 
Experiments are generally high in internal validity because of the manipulation of the independent 
variable and control of extraneous variables. 
• Studies are high in external validity to the extent that the result can be generalized to people and 
situations beyond those actually studied. Although experiments can seem “artificial”—and low in external 
validity—it is important to consider whether the psychological processes under study are likely to 
operate in other people and situations. 
• There are several effective methods you can use to recruit research participants for your experiment, 
including through formal subject pools, advertisements, and personal appeals. Field experiments require 
well-defined participant selection procedures. 
• It is important to standardize experimental procedures to minimize extraneous variables, including 
experimenter expectancy effects. 
• It is important to conduct one or more small-scale pilot tests of an experiment to be sure that the 
procedure works as planned. 
Exercises 
• Practice: List five variables that can be manipulated by the researcher in an experiment. List five variables 
that cannot be manipulated by the researcher in an experiment. 
• Practice: For each of the following topics, decide whether that topic could be studied using an 
138  |  Key Takeaways and Exercisesexperimental research design and explain why or why not. 
◦ Effect of parietal lobe damage on people’s ability to do basic arithmetic. 
◦ Effect of being clinically depressed on the number of close friendships people have. 
◦ Effect of group training on the social skills of teenagers with Asperger’s syndrome. 
◦ Effect of paying people to take an IQ test on their performance on that test. 
• Discussion: Imagine that an experiment shows that participants who receive psychodynamic therapy for 
a dog phobia improve more than participants in a no-treatment control group. Explain a fundamental 
problem with this research design and at least two ways that it might be corrected. 
• Discussion: For each of the following topics, list the pros and cons of a between-subjects and within-
subjects design and decide which would be better. 
◦ You want to test the relative effectiveness of two training programs for running a marathon. 
◦ Using photographs of people as stimuli, you want to see if smiling people are perceived as more 
intelligent than people who are not smiling. 
◦ In a field experiment, you want to see if the way a panhandler is dressed (neatly vs. sloppily) affects 
whether or not passersby give him any money. 
◦ You want to see if concrete nouns (e.g., dog) are recalled better than abstract nouns (e.g., truth). 
• Practice: List two ways that you might recruit participants from each of the following populations: 
◦ elderly adults 
◦ unemployed people 
◦ regular exercisers 
◦ math majors 
• Discussion: Imagine a study in which you will visually present participants with a list of 20 words, one at a 
time, wait for a short time, and then ask them to recall as many of the words as they can. In the stressed 
condition, they are told that they might also be chosen to give a short speech in front of a small audience. 
In the unstressed condition, they are not told that they might have to give a speech. What are several 
specific things that you could do to standardize the procedure? 
Key Takeaways and Exercises  |  139