CHAPTER  VIII 
QUASI-EXPERIMENTAL RESEARCH 
The pr efix quasi means “ resembling.” Thus quasi-e xperimental r esearch is r esearch tha t r esembles 
experimental r esearch but is not true e xperimental r esearch. R ecall wi th a true be tween-groups 
experiment, r andom assignmen t to c onditions is use d to ensur e the gr oups ar e e quivalent and wi th a 
true within-subjects design counterbalancing is used to guard against order effects. Quasi-experiments are 
missing one of these safeguards. Although an independent variable is manipulated, either a control group is 
missing or participants are not randomly assigned to conditions (Cook & Campbell, 1979)1. 
Because the independen t v ariable is manipula ted bef ore the dependen t v ariable is me asured, quasi-
experimental research eliminates the dir ectionality problem associated wi th non-experimental research. 
But because ei ther counterbalancing techniques are not use d or par ticipants are not r andomly assigned 
to c onditions—making i t lik ely tha t ther e ar e other dif ferences be tween c onditions—quasi-experimental 
research does not elimina te the pr oblem of confounding variables. In terms o f internal validity, therefore, 
quasi-experiments are generally somewhere between non-experimental studies and true experiments. 
Quasi-experiments are most likely to be conducted in field settings in which random assignment is difficult 
or impossi ble. They are often conducted to e valuate the ef fectiveness of a tr eatment—perhaps a t ype of 
psychotherapy or an educational intervention. There are many different kinds of quasi-experiments, but we 
will discuss just a few of the most common ones in this chapter. 
Notes 
1. Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (1979). Quasi-experimentation: Design & analysis issues in field settings. Boston, MA: 
Houghton Mifflin. 
Quasi-Experimental Research  |  20738.  One-Group Designs 
Learning Objectives 
1. Explain what quasi-experimental research is and distinguish it clearly from both experimental and 
correlational research. 
2. Describe three different types of one-group quasi-experimental designs. 
3. Identify the threats to internal validity associated with each of these designs. 
One-Group Posttest Only Design 
In a  one-group posttest onl y design , a tr eatment is implemen ted ( or an independen t v ariable is 
manipulated) and then a dependent variable is measured once after the treatment is implemented. Imagine, 
for e xample, a r esearcher who is in terested in the ef fectiveness o f an an ti-drug e ducation pr ogram on 
elementary school students’ attitudes toward illegal drugs. The r esearcher could implement the anti-drug 
program, and then imme diately after the pr ogram ends, the r esearcher could measure students’ attitudes 
toward illegal drugs. 
This is the w eakest t ype o f quasi-e xperimental design. A major limi tation to this design is the lack o f a 
control or comparison group. There is no way to determine what the attitudes of these students would have 
been if they hadn’t completed the anti-drug program. Despite this major limitation, results from this design 
are frequently reported in the media and are often misinterpreted by the general population. For instance, 
advertisers might claim that 80% of women noticed their skin looked bright after using Brand X cleanser for 
a month. If there is no comparison group, then this statistic means little to nothing. 
One-Group Pretest-Posttest Design 
In a one-group pretest-posttest design, the dependen t v ariable is me asured onc e bef ore the tr eatment 
is implemen ted and onc e af ter i t is implemen ted. Le t’s r eturn to the e xample o f a r esearcher who is 
interested in the effectiveness of an anti-drug education program on elementary school students’ attitudes 
toward illegal drugs. The r esearcher c ould me asure the a ttitudes o f studen ts a t a par ticular elemen tary 
school during one week, implement the anti-drug program during the next week, and finally, measure their 
attitudes again the following week. The pretest-posttest design is much like a within-subjects experiment in 
which each participant is tested first under the c ontrol condition and then under the tr eatment condition. 
It is unlik e a wi thin-subjects experiment, however, in tha t the or der of conditions is not c ounterbalanced 
One-Group Designs  |  209because it typically is not possible for a participant to be tested in the treatment condition first and then in 
an “untreated” control condition. 
If the a verage posttest score is be tter than the a verage pretest score (e.g., attitudes toward illegal drugs 
are mor e nega tive af ter the an ti-drug e ducational pr ogram), then i t mak es sense to c onclude tha t the 
treatment might be r esponsible for the impr ovement. Unfortunately, one o ften cannot conclude this wi th 
a high degree of certainty because there may be other e xplanations for why the post test scores may have 
changed. These alternative explanations pose threats to internal validity. 
One alternative explanation goes under the name o f history. Other things mig ht have happened between 
the pretest and the post test that caused a change from pretest to posttest. Perhaps an anti-drug program 
aired on television and many of the students watched it, or perhaps a celebrity died of a drug overdose and 
many of the students heard about it. 
Another alterna tive e xplanation g oes under the name o f maturation. P articipants mig ht ha ve chang ed 
between the pr etest and the post test in w ays that they were going to an yway because they are growing 
and learning. If it were a year long anti-drug program, participants might become less impulsive or better 
reasoners and this might be responsible for the change in their attitudes toward illegal drugs. 
Another thr eat to the in ternal v alidity o f one-gr oup pr etest-posttest designs is  testing, which r efers to 
when the ac t o f me asuring the dependen t v ariable during the pr etest af fects par ticipants’ r esponses a t 
posttest. For instance, completing the me asure of attitudes towards illegal drugs ma y have had an ef fect 
on those a ttitudes. Simply completing this me asure may have inspired further thinking and c onversations 
about illegal drugs that then produced a change in posttest scores. 
Similarly, instrumentation can be a thr eat to the in ternal v alidity o f studies using this design. 
Instrumentation r efers to when the basic char acteristics o f the me asuring instrumen t chang e o ver 
time. When human observers are used to measure behavior, they may over time gain skill, become fatigued, 
or change the standards on which obser vations are based. So participants may have taken the measure of 
attitudes toward illegal drugs v ery seriously during the pr etest when it was novel but then the y may have 
become bored with the measure at posttest and been less careful in considering their responses. 
Another alterna tive e xplanation f or a chang e in the dependen t v ariable in a pr etest-posttest design 
is regression to the mean. This r efers to the sta tistical fact that an individual who sc ores extremely hig h 
or extremely low on a variable on one occasion will tend to sc ore less extremely on the next occasion. For 
example, a bo wler with a long-term a verage of 150 who suddenl y bowls a 220 will almost c ertainly score 
lower in the next game. Her score will “regress” toward her mean score of 150. Regression to the mean can 
be a problem when participants are selected for further study because of their extreme scores. Imagine, for 
example, that only students who scored especially high on the test o f attitudes toward illegal drugs (those 
with extremely favorable attitudes toward drugs) were given the anti-drug program and then were retested. 
Regression to the mean all but guarantees that their scores will be lower at the posttest even if the training 
program has no effect. 
A closel y r elated c oncept—and an e xtremely impor tant one in psy chological 
research—is spontaneous remission. This is the tendency for many medical and psychological problems to 
improve o ver time wi thout an y f orm o f tr eatment. The c ommon c old is a g ood e xample. I f one w ere to 
210  |  One-Group Designsmeasure symptom severity in 100 common cold sufferers today, give them a bowl of chicken soup every day, 
and then me asure their symptom se verity again in a w eek, they would probably be much impr oved. This 
does not mean that the chicken soup was responsible for the improvement, however, because they would 
have been much improved without any treatment at all. The same is true of many psychological problems. A 
group of severely depressed people today is likely to be less depressed on average in 6 months. In reviewing 
the results of several studies o f treatments for depression, researchers Michael P osternak and I van Miller 
found that participants in waitlist control conditions improved an average of 10 to 15% before they received 
any treatment at all (P osternak & Miller, 2001)1. Thus one must g enerally be v ery cautious about inf erring 
causality from pretest-posttest designs. 
A c ommon appr oach to ruling out the thr eats to in ternal v alidity descri bed abo ve is b y r evisiting the 
research design to include a control group, one that does not receive the treatment effect. A control group 
would be subject to the same thr eats from history, maturation, testing, instrumentation, regression to the 
mean, and spon taneous remission and so w ould allow the r esearcher to me asure the ac tual effect of the 
treatment ( if an y). Of c ourse, including a c ontrol gr oup w ould me an tha t this is no long er a one-gr oup 
design. 
 
Does Psychotherapy Work? 
Early studies on the effectiveness of psychotherapy tended to use pretest-posttest designs. In a classic 1952 
article, researcher Hans Eysenck summarized the results of 24 such studies showing that about two thirds of 
patients improved between the pretest and the posttest (Eysenck, 1952)2. But Eysenck also compared these 
results with archival data from state hospital and insurance company records showing that similar patients 
recovered at about the same rate without receiving psychotherapy. This parallel suggested to Eysenck that the 
improvement that patients showed in the pretest-posttest studies might be no more than spontaneous 
remission. Note that Eysenck did not conclude that psychotherapy was ineffective. He merely concluded that 
there was no evidence that it was, and he wrote of “the necessity of properly planned and executed 
experimental studies into this important field” (p. 323). You can read the entire article here: 
http://psychclassics.yorku.ca/Eysenck/psychotherapy.htm 
Fortunately, many other researchers took up Eysenck’s challenge, and by 1980 hundreds of experiments had 
been conducted in which participants were randomly assigned to treatment and control conditions, and the 
results were summarized in a classic book by Mary Lee Smith, Gene Glass, and Thomas Miller (Smith, Glass, & 
Miller, 1980)3. They found that overall psychotherapy was quite effective, with about 80% of treatment 
participants improving more than the average control participant. Subsequent research has focused more on 
the conditions under which different types of psychotherapy are more or less effective. 
One-Group Designs  |  211Interrupted Time Series Design 
A v ariant o f the pr etest-posttest design is the  interrupted time-series design. A time series is a se t o f 
measurements tak en a t in tervals o ver a period o f time. F or e xample, a manufac turing c ompany mig ht 
measure its workers’ productivity each week for a year. In an interrupted time series-design, a time series 
like this one is “in terrupted” b y a tr eatment. I n one classic e xample, the tr eatment w as the r eduction 
of the w ork shif ts in a fac tory fr om 10 hours to 8 hours ( Cook & Campbell, 19 79)4. Because pr oductivity 
increased r ather quickl y af ter the shor tening o f the w ork shif ts, and be cause i t r emained ele vated f or 
many months af terward, the r esearcher concluded that the shor tening of the shif ts caused the incr ease 
in productivity. Notice that the in terrupted time-series design is lik e a pr etest-posttest design in tha t i t 
includes me asurements o f the dependen t v ariable both bef ore and af ter the tr eatment. I t is unlik e the 
pretest-posttest design, however, in that it includes multiple pretest and posttest measurements. 
Figure 8.1  shows da ta fr om a h ypothetical in terrupted time-series stud y. The dependen t v ariable is the 
number of student absences per week in a r esearch methods course. The treatment is that the instructor 
begins publicly taking a ttendance each day so tha t students know that the instruc tor is a ware of who is 
present and who is absen t. The top panel o f Figure 8.1  shows ho w the da ta mig ht look if this tr eatment 
worked. There is a c onsistently high number of absences before the treatment, and there is an imme diate 
and sustained drop in absenc es af ter the tr eatment. The bot tom panel o f Figure 8.1  shows how the da ta 
might look if this treatment did not work. On average, the number of absences after the treatment is about 
the same as the number bef ore. This figur e also illustr ates an ad vantage o f the in terrupted time-series 
design over a simpler pretest-posttest design. If there had been only one measurement of absences before 
the treatment at Week 7 and one af terward at Week 8, then i t would have looked as though the treatment 
were responsible for the reduction. The multiple measurements both before and after the treatment suggest 
that the reduction between Weeks 7 and 8 is nothing more than normal week-to-week variation. 
 
212  |  One-Group DesignsFigure 8.1 A Hypothetical Interrupted Time-Series Design. The top panel shows data that suggest that the 
treatment caused a reduction in absences. The bottom panel shows data that suggest that it did not. [Image 
description] 
Image Descriptions 
Figure 8.1 image description: Two line graphs charting the number of absences per week over 14 weeks. The 
first 7 w eeks are without treatment and the last 7 w eeks are with treatment. In the first line gr aph, there 
are between 4 to 8 absences each week. After the treatment, the absences drop to 0 to 3 each week, which 
suggests the tr eatment worked. In the se cond line gr aph, there is no notic eable change in the number o f 
absences per week after the treatment, which suggests the treatment did not work. [Return to Figure 8.1] 
One-Group Designs  |  213Notes 
1. Posternak, M. A., & Miller, I. (2001). Untreated short-term course of major depression: A meta-analysis of studies using 
outcomes from studies using wait-list control groups. Journal of Affective Disorders, 66, 139–146. 
2. Eysenck, H. J. (1952). The effects of psychotherapy: An evaluation. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 16, 319–324. 
3. Smith, M. L., Glass, G. V., & Miller, T. I. (1980). The benefits of psychotherapy. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University 
Press. 
4. Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (1979). Quasi-experimentation: Design & analysis issues in field settings. Boston, MA: 
Houghton Mifflin. 
214  |  One-Group Designs39.  Non-Equivalent Groups Designs 
Learning Objectives 
1. Describe the different types of nonequivalent groups quasi-experimental designs. 
2. Identify some of the threats to internal validity associated with each of these designs. 
 
Recall tha t when par ticipants in a be tween-subjects e xperiment ar e r andomly assigne d to c onditions, 
the r esulting gr oups ar e lik ely to be qui te similar . I n fac t, r esearchers c onsider them to be e quivalent. 
When par ticipants ar e not r andomly assigne d to c onditions, ho wever, the r esulting gr oups ar e lik ely to 
be dissimilar in some w ays. F or this r eason, r esearchers c onsider them to be none quivalent. 
A nonequivalent groups design, then, is a be tween-subjects design in which par ticipants ha ve not be en 
randomly assigned to conditions. There are several types of nonequivalent groups designs we will consider. 
Posttest Only Nonequivalent Groups Design 
The first nonequivalent groups design we will consider is the posttest only nonequivalent groups design. In 
this design, participants in one group are exposed to a treatment, a nonequivalent group is not exposed to 
the treatment, and then the t wo groups are compared. Imagine, for example, a r esearcher who w ants to 
evaluate a new method of teaching fractions to third graders. One way would be to conduct a study with a 
treatment group consisting of one class o f third-grade students and a c ontrol group consisting of another 
class of third-grade students. This design w ould be a none quivalent groups design be cause the studen ts 
are not randomly assigned to classes by the researcher, which means there could be important differences 
between them. For example, the parents of higher achieving or more motivated students might have been 
more likely to r equest that their childr en be assigne d to Ms. W illiams’s class. Or the principal mig ht have 
assigned the “tr oublemakers” to Mr . J ones’s class be cause he is a str onger disciplinarian. Of c ourse, the 
teachers’ styles, and e ven the classr oom environments might be v ery different and mig ht cause different 
levels of achievement or motivation among the students. If at the end of the study there was a difference in 
the two classes’ knowledge of fractions, it might have been caused by the difference between the teaching 
methods—but it might have been caused by any of these confounding variables. 
Of course, researchers using a posttest only nonequivalent groups design can take steps to ensure that their 
groups are as similar as possi ble. In the present example, the researcher could try to select two classes at 
the same school, wher e the studen ts in the t wo classes ha ve similar sc ores on a standar dized math test 
and the te achers are the same se x, are close in ag e, and ha ve similar te aching st yles. Taking such steps 
Non-Equivalent Groups Designs  |  215would increase the in ternal validity of the stud y because it would eliminate some o f the most impor tant 
confounding variables. But without true r andom assignment of the studen ts to c onditions, there remains 
the possibility of other important confounding variables that the researcher was not able to control. 
Pretest-Posttest Nonequivalent Groups Design 
Another w ay to impr ove upon the post test onl y none quivalent gr oups design is to add a pr etest. I n 
the pretest-posttest nonequi valent gr oups design  there is a tr eatment gr oup tha t is g iven a pr etest, 
receives a tr eatment, and then is g iven a post test. But at the same time ther e is a none quivalent control 
group that is g iven a pr etest, does not receive the tr eatment, and then is g iven a post test. The question, 
then, is not simpl y whe ther par ticipants who r eceive the tr eatment impr ove, but whe ther the y 
improve more than participants who do not receive the treatment. 
Imagine, for example, that students in one school are given a pretest on their attitudes toward drugs, then 
are exposed to an anti-drug program, and finally, are given a posttest. Students in a similar school are given 
the pr etest, not e xposed to an an ti-drug pr ogram, and finall y, ar e g iven a post test. Again, if studen ts in 
the treatment condition become more negative toward drugs, this chang e in a ttitude could be an ef fect 
of the tr eatment, but i t c ould also be a ma tter o f histor y or ma turation. I f i t r eally is an ef fect o f the 
treatment, then studen ts in the tr eatment condition should be come more negative than studen ts in the 
control c ondition. B ut if i t is a ma tter o f histor y (e.g., ne ws o f a c elebrity drug o verdose) or ma turation 
(e.g., improved reasoning), then students in the t wo conditions would be likely to show similar amounts of 
change. This type of design does not completely eliminate the possibility of confounding variables, however. 
Something could occur at one of the schools but not the other (e.g., a student drug overdose), so students at 
the first school would be affected by it while students at the other school would not. 
Returning to the e xample o f e valuating a ne w me asure o f te aching thir d gr aders, this stud y c ould be 
improved b y adding a pr etest o f studen ts’ kno wledge o f fr actions. The chang es in sc ores fr om pr etest 
to post test would then be e valuated and c ompared acr oss c onditions to de termine whe ther one gr oup 
demonstrated a bigger improvement in knowledge of fractions than another. Of course, the teachers’ styles, 
and e ven the classr oom en vironments mig ht still be v ery dif ferent and mig ht c ause dif ferent le vels o f 
achievement or motiv ation among the studen ts that are independent of the te aching intervention. Once 
again, differential history also represents a potential threat to internal validity.  If asbestos is f ound in one 
of the schools c ausing it to be shut do wn for a mon th then this in terruption in te aching could produce a 
difference across groups on posttest scores. 
If participants in this kind of design are randomly assigned to conditions, it becomes a true between-groups 
experiment rather than a quasi-experiment. In fact, it is the kind of experiment that Eysenck called for—and 
that has now been conducted many times—to demonstrate the effectiveness of psychotherapy. 
216  |  Non-Equivalent Groups DesignsInterrupted Time-Series Design with Nonequivalent Groups 
One w ay to impr ove upon the in terrupted time-series design is to add a c ontrol gr oup. The
interrupted time-series design wi th nonequi valent gr oups involves taking  a se t o f me asurements a t 
intervals over a period of time both before and after an intervention of interest in two or more nonequivalent 
groups. Once again consider the manufacturing company that measures its workers’ productivity each week 
for a y ear before and af ter reducing work shifts from 10 hours to 8 hours. This design c ould be impr oved 
by locating another manufacturing company who does not plan to change their shift length and using them 
as a nonequivalent control group. If productivity increased rather quickly after the shortening of the work 
shifts in the treatment group but productivity remained consistent in the control group, then this provides 
better evidence for the effectiveness of the treatment. 
Similarly, in the e xample of examining the ef fects of taking a ttendance on studen t absences in a r esearch 
methods c ourse, the design c ould be impr oved b y using studen ts in another se ction o f the r esearch 
methods course as a control group. If a consistently higher number of absences was found in the treatment 
group bef ore the in tervention, f ollowed b y a sustaine d dr op in absenc es af ter the tr eatment, while the 
nonequivalent c ontrol gr oup sho wed c onsistently hig h absenc es acr oss the semester then this w ould 
provide superior evidence for the effectiveness of the treatment in reducing absences. 
Pretest-Posttest Design With Switching Replication 
Some o f these none quivalent c ontrol gr oup designs c an be fur ther impr oved b y adding a swi tching 
replication. U sing a pretest-posttest design wi th swi tching r eplication design , nonequivalent gr oups 
are administer ed a pr etest o f the dependen t v ariable, then  one gr oup r eceives a tr eatment while a 
nonequivalent control group does not r eceive a tr eatment, the dependen t variable is assesse d again, and 
then the tr eatment is adde d to the c ontrol group, and finall y the dependen t variable is assesse d one last 
time. 
As a c oncrete e xample, le t’s sa y w e w anted to in troduce an e xercise in tervention f or the tr eatment o f 
depression. We recruit one group of patients experiencing depression and a nonequivalent control group of 
students experiencing depression. We first measure depression levels in both groups, and then we introduce 
the e xercise in tervention to the pa tients e xperiencing depr ession, but w e hold o ff on in troducing the 
treatment to the studen ts. We then measure depression levels in both gr oups. If the treatment is effective 
we should see a reduction in the depr ession levels of the patients (who received the treatment) but not in 
the students (who have not y et received the tr eatment). Finally, while the gr oup of patients continues to 
engage in the treatment, we would introduce the treatment to the students with depression. Now and only 
now should we see the students’ levels of depression decrease. 
One of the strengths of this design is tha t it includes a built in r eplication. In the example given, we would 
get e vidence f or the ef ficacy o f the tr eatment in t wo dif ferent samples (pa tients and studen ts). Another 
strength of this design is tha t it provides more control over history effects. It becomes rather unlikely that 
some outside event would perfectly coincide with the introduction of the treatment in the first gr oup and 
Non-Equivalent Groups Designs  |  217with the delayed introduction of the treatment in the second group. For instance, if a change in the weather 
occurred when w e first in troduced the tr eatment to the pa tients, and this e xplained their r eductions in 
depression the second time that depression was measured, then we would see depression levels decrease 
in both the groups. Similarly, the switching replication helps to control for maturation and instrumentation. 
Both groups would be expected to show the same r ates of spontaneous remission of depression and if the 
instrument for assessing depression happened to chang e at some point in the stud y the chang e would be 
consistent across both of the groups. Of course, demand characteristics, placebo effects, and experimenter 
expectancy effects can still be problems. But they can be controlled for using some of the methods described 
in Chapter 5. 
Switching Replication with Treatment Removal Design 
In a basic pr etest-posttest design wi th switching replication, the first gr oup receives a tr eatment and the 
second group receives the same tr eatment a little bit later on (while the initial group continues to receive 
the tr eatment). In c ontrast, in a switching r eplication wi th tr eatment r emoval design , the tr eatment is 
removed fr om the first gr oup when i t is adde d to the se cond gr oup. Onc e again, le t’s assume w e first 
measure the depression levels of patients with depression and students with depression. Then we introduce 
the exercise intervention to onl y the pa tients. After they have been exposed to the e xercise intervention 
for a week we assess depression levels again in both gr oups. If the intervention is effective then we should 
see depr ession le vels de crease in the pa tient gr oup but not the studen t gr oup (be cause the studen ts 
haven’t r eceived the tr eatment y et). N ext, w e w ould r emove the tr eatment fr om the gr oup o f pa tients 
with depression. So w e would tell them to stop e xercising. At the same time, w e would tell the studen t 
group to start exercising. After a week of the students exercising and the patients not exercising, we would 
reassess depression levels. Now if the intervention is effective we should see that the depression levels have 
decreased in the student group but that they have increased in the patient group (because they are no longer 
exercising). 
Demonstrating a treatment effect in two groups staggered over time and demonstrating the reversal of the 
treatment effect after the treatment has been removed can provide strong evidence for the efficacy of the 
treatment. In addition to providing evidence for the replicability of the findings, this design can also provide 
evidence for whether the treatment continues to show effects after it has been withdrawn. 
218  |  Non-Equivalent Groups Designs40.  Key Takeaways and Exercises 
Key Takeaways 
• Quasi-experimental research involves the manipulation of an independent variable without the random 
assignment of participants to conditions or counterbalancing of orders of conditions. 
• There are three types of quasi-experimental designs that are within-subjects in nature. These are the 
one-group posttest only design, the one-group pretest-posttest design, and the interrupted time-series 
design. 
• There are five types of quasi-experimental designs that are between-subjects in nature. These are the 
posttest only design with nonequivalent groups, the pretest-posttest design with nonequivalent groups, 
the interrupted time-series design with nonequivalent groups, the pretest-posttest design with 
switching replication, and the switching replication with treatment removal design. 
• Quasi-experimental research eliminates the directionality problem because it involves the manipulation 
of the independent variable. However, it does not eliminate the problem of confounding variables, 
because it does not involve random assignment to conditions or counterbalancing. For these reasons, 
quasi-experimental research is generally higher in internal validity than non-experimental studies but 
lower than true experiments. 
• Of all of the quasi-experimental designs, those that include a switching replication are highest in internal 
validity. 
Exercises 
• Practice: Imagine that two professors decide to test the effect of giving daily quizzes on student 
performance in a statistics course. They decide that Professor A will give quizzes but Professor B will not. 
They will then compare the performance of students in their two sections on a common final exam. List 
five other variables that might differ between the two sections that could affect the results. 
• Discussion: Imagine that a group of obese children is recruited for a study in which their weight is 
measured, then they participate for 3 months in a program that encourages them to be more active, and 
finally their weight is measured again. Explain how each of the following might affect the results: 
◦ regression to the mean 
◦ spontaneous remission 
◦ history 
◦ maturation 
Key Takeaways and Exercises  |  219