CHAPTER  XI 
PRESENTING YOUR RESEARCH 
Research is complete only when the results are shared with the scientific community. 
-American Psychological Association 
Imagine that you have identified an interesting research question, reviewed the relevant literature, designed 
and conducted an empirical study, analyzed the data, and drawn your conclusions. There is still one mor e 
step in the process of conducting scientific research. It is time to add your research to the literature so that 
others can learn from it and build on it. Remember that science is a social and cumulative process—a large-
scale collaboration among many researchers distributed across space and time. For this reason, it could be 
argued that unless you make your research public in some form, you are not really engaged in science at all. 
In this chapter, we look at how to present your research effectively. We begin with a discussion of American 
Psychological Association (APA) style—the primary approach to writing taken by researchers in psychology 
and related fields. Then w e consider how to wri te an APA-style empirical research report. Finally, we look 
at some of the many other ways in which researchers present their work, including review and theoretical 
articles, theses and other student papers, and talks and posters at professional meetings. 
Presenting Your Research  |  26148.  American Psychological Association (APA) 
Style 
Learning Objectives 
1. Define APA style and list several of its most important characteristics. 
2. Identify three levels of APA style and give examples of each. 
3. Identify multiple sources of information about APA style. 
What Is APA Style? 
APA style is a se t o f guidelines f or wri ting in psy chology and r elated fields. These guidelines ar e se t 
down in the Publication Manual of the A merican Psychological Association (APA, 2010)1. The Publication 
Manual originated in 1929 as a short journal article that provided basic standards for preparing manuscripts 
to be submi tted for public ation (Bentley et al., 1929 )2. It was later expanded and publishe d as a book b y 
the association and is no w in i ts sixth e dition. The primar y purpose o f APA style is to facili tate scientific 
communication by promoting clarity of expression and b y standardizing the or ganization and c ontent of 
research articles and book chapters. I t is easier to write about research when you know what information 
to present, the order in which to present it, and even the style in which to present it. Likewise, it is easier to 
read about research when it is presented in familiar and expected ways. 
APA st yle is best thoug ht o f as a “ genre” o f wri ting tha t is appr opriate f or pr esenting the r esults o f 
psychological research—especially in academic and professional contexts. It is not synonymous with “good 
writing” in g eneral. You would not wri te a li terary analysis for an Eng lish class, e ven if i t were based on 
psychoanalytic c oncepts, in AP A st yle. You w ould wri te i t in M odern L anguage Associa tion (ML A) st yle 
instead. And you would not write a newspaper article, even if it were about a new breakthrough in behavioral 
neuroscience, in APA style. You would write it in Associated Press (AP) style instead. At the same time, y ou 
would not write an empirical research report in MLA style, in AP style, or in the style of a romance novel, an 
email to a friend, or a shopping list. You would write it in APA style. Part of being a good writer in general is 
adopting a style that is appropriate to the writing task at hand, and for writing about psychological research, 
this is APA style. 
American Psychological Association (APA) Style  |  263The Levels of APA Style 
Because APA style consists of a lar ge number and v ariety of guidelines—the Publication Manual is nearly 
300 pag es long—i t c an be useful to think about i t in terms o f thr ee basic le vels. The first is the o verall 
organization o f an ar ticle ( which is c overed in Chapter 2 “Manuscript S tructure and Con tent” o f 
the Publication Manual). Empirical research reports, in particular, have several distinct sections that always 
appear in the same order: 
• Title page. Presents the article title and author names and affiliations. 
• Abstract. Summarizes the research. 
• Introduction. Describes previous research and the rationale for the current study. 
• Method. Describes how the study was conducted. 
• Results. Describes the results of the study. 
• Discussion. Summarizes the study and discusses its implications. 
• References. Lists the references cited throughout the article. 
The second level of APA style can be referred to as  high-level style (covered in Chapter 3 “ Writing Clearly 
and Concisel y” of the  Publication M anual), which includes guidelines f or the cle ar e xpression o f ide as. 
There ar e t wo impor tant themes her e. One is tha t AP A-style wri ting is f ormal r ather than inf ormal. I t 
adopts a tone tha t is appr opriate for communicating with professional colleagues—other researchers and 
practitioners—who share an in terest in the topic. Be yond this shar ed interest, however, these c olleagues 
are not ne cessarily similar to the wri ter or to e ach other. A gr aduate studen t in B ritish Columbia  might 
be writing an article that will be r ead by a young psychotherapist in Toronto and a respected professor of 
psychology in T okyo. Thus f ormal writing avoids slang, c ontractions, pop cultur e references, humor, and 
other elements that would be acceptable in talking with a friend or in writing informally. 
The second theme o f hig h-level APA style is tha t i t is str aightforward. This me ans that i t communicates 
ideas as simpl y and cle arly as possi ble, put ting the f ocus on the ide as themsel ves and not on ho w the y 
are c ommunicated. Thus AP A-style wri ting minimiz es li terary de vices such as me taphor, imag ery, ir ony, 
suspense, and so on. Again, humor is k ept to a minimum. Sen tences are short and direct. Technical terms 
must be use d, but the y are used to impr ove communication, not simpl y to mak e the wri ting sound mor e 
“scientific.” F or e xample, if par ticipants immerse d their hands in a buck et o f ic e w ater, i t is be tter just 
to write this than to wri te that they “were subjected to a pain-induc ement apparatus.” At the same time, 
however, there is no be tter way to communicate that a between-subjects design was used than to use the 
term “between-subjects design.” 
 
264  |  American Psychological Association (APA) StyleAPA Style and the Values of Psychology 
Robert Madigan and his colleagues have argued that APA style has a purpose that often goes unrecognized 
(Madigan, Johnson, & Linton, 1995)3. Specifically, it promotes psychologists’ scientific values and assumptions. 
From this perspective, many features of APA style that at first seem arbitrary actually make good sense. 
Following are several features of APA-style writing and the scientific values or assumptions they reflect. 
 
APA style feature Scientific value or assumption 
There are very few direct quotations of 
other researchers. 
The phenomena and theories of psychology are objective and do not depend 
on the specific words a particular researcher used to describe them. 
Criticisms are directed at other 
researchers’ work but not at them 
personally. 
The focus of scientific research is on drawing general conclusions about the 
world, not on the personalities of particular researchers. 
There are many references and reference 
citations. Scientific research is a large-scale collaboration among many researchers. 
Empirical research reports are organized 
with specific sections in a fixed order. 
There is an ideal approach to conducting empirical research in psychology 
(even if this ideal is not always achieved in actual research). 
Researchers tend to “hedge” their 
conclusions, e.g., “The 
results suggest that…” 
Scientific knowledge is tentative and always subject to revision based on new 
empirical results. 
 
Another impor tant elemen t o f hig h-level AP A st yle is the a voidance o f languag e tha t is biase d against 
particular groups. This is not onl y to a void offending people—why would you want to o ffend people who 
are in terested in y our w ork?—but also f or the sak e o f scien tific obje ctivity and ac curacy. F or e xample, 
the term  sexual orientation  should be use d inste ad o f sexual pr eference because pe ople do not g enerally 
experience their orien tation as a “ preference,” nor is i t as e asily chang eable as this term sugg ests ( APA 
Committee on Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Concerns Joint Task Force on Guidelines for Psychotherapy With 
Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Clients, 2000)4. 
The general principles for avoiding biased language are fairly simple. First, be sensitive to labels by avoiding 
terms that are offensive or ha ve negative connotations. This includes a voiding terms tha t identify people 
with a disor der or other pr oblem the y happen to ha ve. I nstead, r efer to the individual, wha t the AP A 
Publication M anual refers to as put ting the “ person first. ” F or e xample, people diagnosed with 
schizophrenia is better than schizophrenics. Second, use more specific terms rather than more general ones. 
For example, Chinese Americans is better than Asian Americans if everyone in the group is, in fact, Chinese 
American. Third, avoid objectifying research par ticipants. Instead, acknowledge their ac tive contribution 
to the research. For example, “The students completed the questionnaire” is better than “ The subjects were 
administered the questionnair e.” N ote tha t this principle also mak es f or cle arer, mor e engag ing 
writing. Table 11.1 shows several more examples that follow these general principles. 
American Psychological Association (APA) Style  |  265 
Table 11.1 Examples of Avoiding Biased Language 
Instead of… Use… 
man, men men and women, people 
firemen firefighters 
homosexuals, gays, bisexuals lesbians, gay men, bisexual men, bisexual women 
minority specific group label (e.g., African American) 
neurotics people scoring high in neuroticism 
special children children with learning disabilities 
 
The previous edition of the  Publication Manual strongly discouraged the use o f the term  subjects (except 
for nonhumans ) and str ongly enc ouraged the use o f participants instead. The curr ent e dition, ho wever, 
acknowledges that subjects can still be appr opriate in r eferring to human par ticipants in ar eas in which i t 
has traditionally been used (e.g., basic memor y research). But it also enc ourages the use o f more specific 
terms when possible: university students, children, respondents, and so on. 
The thir d le vel o f AP A st yle c an be r eferred to as  low-level style (which is c overed in  Chapter 4 “ The 
Mechanics o f S tyle” through Chapter 7 “R eference Examples”  of the  Publication M anual). Lo w-level st yle 
includes all the spe cific guidelines per taining to spelling, gr ammar, r eferences and r eference ci tations, 
numbers and sta tistics, figur es and tables, and so on. Ther e ar e so man y lo w-level guidelines tha t e ven 
experienced pr ofessionals ne ed to c onsult the Publication M anual from time to time.  Table 11.2 c ontains 
some of the most common types of APA style errors based on an analysis of manuscripts submitted to one 
professional journal o ver a 6- year period ( Onwuegbuzie, Combs, Sla te, & F rels, 2010)5. These err ors were 
committed by professional researchers but are probably similar to those that students commit the most too. 
See also Note 11.8 “Online APA Style Resources” in this section and, of course, the Publication Manual itself. 
 
266  |  American Psychological Association (APA) StyleTable 11.2 Top 10 APA Style Errors 
Error type Example 
1. Use of numbers Failing to use numerals for 10 and above 
2. Hyphenation Failing to hyphenate compound adjectives that precede a noun (e.g., “role playing technique” 
should be “role-playing technique”) 
3. Use of et al. Failing to use it after a reference is cited for the first time 
4. Headings Not capitalizing headings correctly 
5. Use of since Using since to mean because 
6. Tables and 
figures Not formatting them in APA style; repeating information that is already given in the text 
7. Use of commas Failing to use a comma before and or or in a series of three or more elements 
8. Use of 
abbreviations Failing to spell out a term completely before introducing an abbreviation for it 
9. Spacing Not consistently double-spacing between lines 
10. Use of “&” in 
references Using & in the text or and in parentheses 
Online APA Style Resources 
The best source of information on APA style is the Publication Manual itself. However, there are also many good 
websites on APA style, which do an excellent job of presenting the basics for beginning researchers. Here are a 
few of them. 
APA Style 
http://www.apastyle.org 
Purdue Online Writing Lab 
http://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/resource/560/01 
Douglas Degelman’s APA Style Essentials 
http://www.vanguard.edu/psychology/faculty/douglas-degelman/apa-style/ 
Doc Scribe’s APA Style Lite 
http://people.cs.ksu.edu/~huichen/APA%20Lite%20Writing%20Guidelines.pdf 
APA-Style References and Citations 
Because scienc e is a lar ge-scale c ollaboration among r esearchers, r eferences to the w ork o f other 
American Psychological Association (APA) Style  |  267researchers are extremely important. Their importance is reflected in the extensive and detailed set of rules 
for formatting and using them. 
References 
At the end of an APA-style article or book chapter is a list tha t contains references to all the works cited in 
the text (and only the works cited in the te xt). The reference list beg ins on its own page, with the heading 
“References,” centered in upper and lo wer case. The r eferences themselves are then liste d alphabetically 
according to the last names o f the first name d a uthor f or e ach ci tation. ( As in the r est o f an AP A-style 
manuscript, everything is double-spaced.) Many different kinds of works might be cited in APA-style articles 
and book chapters, including magazine ar ticles, w ebsites, g overnment documen ts, and e ven tele vision 
shows. Of course, you should consult the Publication Manual or Online APA Style Resources for details on 
how to format them. Here we will focus on formatting references for the three most common kinds of works 
cited in APA style: journal articles, books, and book chapters. 
Journal Articles 
For journal articles, the generic format for a reference is as follows: 
Author, A. A., Author, B. B., & Author, C. C. (year). Title of article. Title of Journal, volume(issue), pp–pp. 
doi:xx.xxxxxxxxxx 
 
Here is a concrete example: 
Adair, J. G., & Vohra, N. (2003). The explosion of knowledge, references, and citations: Psychology’s unique 
response to a crisis. American Psychologist, 58(1), 15–23. doi: 10.1037/0003-066X.58.1.15 
 
There are several things to notice here. The reference includes a hanging indent. That is, the first line of the 
reference is not inden ted but all subse quent lines are. The authors’ names appear in the same or der as on 
the article, which reflects the authors’ relative contributions to the r esearch. Only the authors’ last names 
and initials appear, and the names ar e separated by commas with an ampersand (&) be tween the last t wo. 
This is true even when there are only two authors. Only the first word of the article title is capitalized. The 
only exceptions are for words that are proper nouns or adje ctives (e.g., “Freudian”) or if ther e is a subti tle, 
in which case the first word of the subtitle is also capitalized. In the journal title, however, all the important 
268  |  American Psychological Association (APA) Stylewords are capitalized. The journal title and volume number are italicized; however, the issue number (listed 
within par entheses) is not. A t the v ery end o f the r eference is the dig ital obje ct iden tifier (DO I), which 
provides a permanen t link to the loc ation o f the ar ticle on the I nternet. I nclude this if i t is a vailable. I t 
can generally be found in the r ecord for the i tem on an ele ctronic database (e.g., PsycINFO) and is usuall y 
displayed on the first page of the published article. 
Books 
For a book, the generic format and a concrete example are as follows: 
Author, A. A. (year). Title of book. Location: Publisher. 
Kashdan, T., & Biswas-Diener, R. (2014). The upside of your dark side. New York, NY: Hudson Street Press. 
Book Chapters 
For a chapter in an edited book, the generic format and a concrete example are as follows: 
Author, A. A., Author, B. B., & Author, C. C. (year). Title of chapter. In A. A. Editor, B. B. Editor, & C. C. Editor 
(Eds.), Title of book (pp. xxx–xxx). Location: Publisher. 
Lilienfeld, S. O., & Lynn, S. J. (2003). Dissociative identity disorder: Multiple personalities, multiple 
controversies. In S. O. Lilienfeld, S. J. Lynn, & J. M. Lohr (Eds.), Science and pseudoscience in clinical 
psychology (pp. 109–142). New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
 
Notice that references for books and book chapters ar e similar to those f or journal ar ticles, but ther e are 
several dif ferences too. F or an e dited book, the names o f the e ditors appe ar wi th their first and middle 
initials followed by their last names ( not the other w ay around)—with the abbr eviation “Eds.” (or “Ed.,” if 
there is only one) appearing in parentheses immediately after the final editor’s name. Only the first word of 
a book title is capitalized (with the exceptions noted for article titles), and the entire title is italicized. For a 
chapter in an edited book, the page numbers of the chapter appear in parentheses after the book title with 
the abbreviation “pp.” Finally, both formats end with the location of publication and the publisher, separated 
by a colon. 
American Psychological Association (APA) Style  |  269Reference Citations 
When y ou r efer to another r esearcher’s ide a, y ou must include a reference citation (in the te xt) to the 
work in which tha t idea orig inally appeared and a full r eference to tha t work in the r eference list. W hat 
counts as an idea that must be cited? In general, this includes phenomena discovered by other researchers, 
theories the y ha ve de veloped, h ypotheses the y ha ve deriv ed, and spe cific me thods the y ha ve use d (e.g., 
specific questionnaires or stimulus ma terials). Citations should also appe ar for factual information that is 
not common knowledge so that other researchers can check that information for themselves. For example, 
in an article on the effect of cell phone usage on driving ability, the writer might cite official statistics on the 
number of cell phone–related accidents that occur each year. Among the ideas that do not need citations are 
widely shared methodological and statistical concepts (e.g., between-subjects design, t test) and statements 
that ar e so br oad tha t the y w ould be dif ficult f or an yone to ar gue wi th (e.g., “ Working memor y pla ys a 
role in man y daily activities.”). Be c areful, though, because “common knowledge” about human beha vior is 
often incorrect. Therefore, when in doubt, find an appropriate reference to cite or remove the questionable 
assertion. 
When you cite a w ork in the te xt of your manuscript, ther e are two ways to do i t. Both include onl y the 
last names of the authors and the year of publication. The first method is to use the a uthors’ last names in 
the sentence (with no first names or initials) followed immediately by the year of publication in parentheses. 
Here are some examples: 
Burger (2008) conducted a replication of Milgram’s (1963) original obedience study. 
Although many pe ople belie ve that women are more talkative than men, M ehl, Vazire, Ramirez-Esparza, 
Slatcher, and Pennebaker (2007) found essentially no difference in the number of words spoken by male and 
female college students. 
Notice several things. First, the authors’ names are treated grammatically as names of people, not as things. 
It is better to wri te “a replication of Milgram’s (1963) study” than “a replication of Milgram (1963).” Second, 
when there are two authors the names ar e not separ ated by commas, but when ther e are three or mor e 
authors they are. Third, the word and (rather than an ampersand) is used to join the authors’ names. Fourth, 
the year follows immediately after the final a uthor’s name. An addi tional point, which is not illustr ated in 
these examples but is illustrated in the sample paper in Section 11.2 “Writing a Research Report in American 
Psychological Association (APA) Style”, is that the year only needs to be include d the first time a par ticular 
work is cited in the same paragraph. 
The second way to cite an article or a book chapter is parenthetically—including the authors’ last names and 
the year of publication in parentheses following the idea that is being credited. Here are some examples: 
People can be surprisingly obedient to authority figures (Burger, 2008; Milgram, 1963). 
Recent e vidence sugg ests tha t men and w omen ar e similar ly talka tive (M ehl, V azire, Ramir ez-Esparza, 
Slatcher, & Pennebaker, 2007). 
One thing to notic e about such par enthetical ci tations is tha t the y ar e o ften plac ed a t the end o f the 
270  |  American Psychological Association (APA) Stylesentence, which minimiz es their disruption to the flo w o f tha t sen tence. I n c ontrast to the first w ay o f 
citing a w ork, this w ay al ways includes the y ear—even when the ci tation is g iven multiple times in the 
same paragraph. Notice also that when there are multiple citations in the same set of parentheses, they are 
organized alphabetically by the name of the first author and separated by semicolons. 
There ar e no stric t rules f or de ciding which o f the t wo ci tation st yles to use. M ost ar ticles and book 
chapters contain a mixtur e of the t wo. In general, however, the first appr oach works well when y ou want 
to emphasize the person who c onducted the r esearch—for example, if y ou were comparing the the ories 
of two prominent researchers. It also works well when you are describing a particular study in detail. The 
second approach works well when you are discussing a general idea and especially when you want to include 
multiple citations for the same idea. 
The third most common error in Table 11.2 has to do with the use of et al. This is an abbreviation for the Latin 
term et alia, which means “and others.” In APA style, if an article or a book chapter has more than two authors 
but fewer than six, you should include all their names when you first cite that work. After that, however, you 
should use the first a uthor’s name f ollowed by “et al.” If the ar ticle has onl y two authors then both should 
be included in every citation. If an article has six or more authors then you should only list the name of the 
first author followed by et al. e ach and e very time y ou cite that work (even the first time ). Here are some 
examples: 
Recall that Mehl et al. (2007) found that women and men spoke about the same number of words per day on 
average. 
There is a str ong positive correlation between the number o f daily hassles and the number o f symptoms 
people experience (Kanner et al., 1981). 
Notice that there is no comma between the first author’s name and “et al.” Notice also that there is no period 
after “et” but there is one after “al.” This is because “et” is a complete word and “al.” is an abbreviation for the 
word alia. 
Notes 
1. American Psychological Association. (2010). Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association (6th ed.). 
Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association. 
2. Bentley, M., Peerenboom, C. A., Hodge, F. W., Passano, E. B., Warren, H. C., & Washburn, M. F. (1929). Instructions in 
regard to preparation of manuscript. Psychological Bulletin, 26, 57–63. 
3. Madigan, R., Johnson, S., & Linton, P. (1995). The language of psychology: APA style as epistemology. American 
Psychologist, 50, 428–436. 
4. American Psychological Association, Committee on Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Concerns Joint Task Force on 
Guidelines for Psychotherapy With Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Clients. (2000). Guidelines for psychotherapy with 
lesbian, gay, and bisexual clients. Retrieved from https://www.apa.org/pi/lgbt/resources/guidelines 
5. Onwuegbuzie, A. J., Combs, J. P., Slate, J. R., & Frels, R. K. (2010). Editorial: Evidence-based guidelines for avoiding the 
most common APA errors in journal article submissions. Research in the Schools, 16, ix–xxxvi. 
American Psychological Association (APA) Style  |  27149.  Writing a Research Report in American 
Psychological Association (APA) Style 
Learning Objectives 
1. Identify the major sections of an APA-style research report and the basic contents of each section. 
2. Plan and write an effective APA-style research report. 
 
In this section, we look at how to write an APA-style empirical research report, an article that presents the 
results of one or more new studies. Recall that the standard sections of an empirical research report provide 
a kind of outline. Here we consider each of these sections in detail, including what information it contains, 
how that information is formatted and organized, and tips for writing each section. At the end of this section 
is a sample APA-style research report that illustrates many of these principles. 
Sections of a Research Report 
Title Page and Abstract 
An APA-style research report begins with a title page. The ti tle is c entered in the upper half o f the pag e, 
with each important word capitalized. The ti tle should cle arly and c oncisely (in about 12 w ords or f ewer) 
communicate the primary variables and research questions. This some times requires a main ti tle followed 
by a subti tle tha t elabor ates on the main ti tle, in which c ase the main ti tle and subti tle ar e separ ated 
by a c olon. H ere ar e some ti tles fr om r ecent issues o f pr ofessional journals publishe d b y the Americ an 
Psychological Association. 
• Sex Differences in Coping Styles and Implications for Depressed Mood 
• Effects of Aging and Divided Attention on Memory for Items and Their Contexts 
• Computer-Assisted Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Child Anxiety: Results of a Randomized Clinical 
Trial 
• Virtual Driving and Risk Taking: Do Racing Games Increase Risk-Taking Cognitions, Affect, and 
Behavior? 
272  |  Writing a Research Report in American Psychological
Association (APA) StyleBelow the title are the authors’ names and, on the ne xt line, their institutional affiliation—the university or 
other institution where the a uthors worked when the y conducted the r esearch. As w e have already seen, 
the authors are listed in an or der that reflects their c ontribution to the r esearch. When multiple a uthors 
have made equal contributions to the r esearch, they often list their names alphabe tically or in a r andomly 
determined order. 
 
It’s Soooo Cute! How Informal Should an Article Title Be? 
In some areas of psychology, the titles of many empirical research reports are informal in a way that is perhaps 
best described as “cute.” They usually take the form of a play on words or a well-known expression that relates 
to the topic under study. Here are some examples from recent issues of the Journal Psychological Science. 
• “Smells Like Clean Spirit: Nonconscious Effects of Scent on Cognition and Behavior” 
• “Time Crawls: The Temporal Resolution of Infants’ Visual Attention” 
• “Scent of a Woman: Men’s Testosterone Responses to Olfactory Ovulation Cues” 
• “Apocalypse Soon?: Dire Messages Reduce Belief in Global Warming by Contradicting Just-World Beliefs” 
• “Serial vs. Parallel Processing: Sometimes They Look Like Tweedledum and Tweedledee but They Can 
(and Should) Be Distinguished” 
• “How Do I Love Thee? Let Me Count the Words: The Social Effects of Expressive Writing” 
Individual researchers differ quite a bit in their preference for such titles. Some use them regularly, while 
others never use them. What might be some of the pros and cons of using cute article titles? 
 
For articles that are being submi tted for publication, the ti tle page also includes an a uthor note tha t lists 
the authors’ full insti tutional affiliations, any acknowledgments the a uthors wish to mak e to ag encies that 
funded the r esearch or to c olleagues who c ommented on i t, and c ontact information for the a uthors. For 
student papers that are not being submi tted for publication—including theses—author notes are generally 
not necessary. 
The abstract is a summar y of the stud y. It is the se cond page of the manuscript and is he aded wi th the 
word Abstract. The first line is not indented. The abstract presents the research question, a summary of the 
method, the basic r esults, and the most impor tant conclusions. Because the abstr act is usuall y limited to 
about 200 words, it can be a challenge to write a good one. 
Introduction 
The introduction begins on the third page of the manuscript. The heading at the top of this page is the full 
Writing a Research Report in American Psychological Association (APA) Style  |  273title of the manuscript, with each important word capitalized as on the title page. The introduction includes 
three distinct subsections, althoug h these ar e typically not iden tified by separate headings. The opening 
introduces the research question and explains why it is interesting, the literature review discusses relevant 
previous research, and the closing r estates the r esearch question and c omments on the me thod used to 
answer it. 
The Opening 
The opening, which is usually a paragraph or two in length, introduces the research question and explains 
why i t is in teresting. To capture the r eader’s attention, researcher Daryl Bem r ecommends starting wi th 
general obser vations about the topic under stud y, e xpressed in or dinary languag e ( not te chnical 
jargon)—observations that are about pe ople and their beha vior (not about r esearchers or their r esearch; 
Bem, 20031). Concrete examples are often very useful here. According to Bem, this would be a poor way to 
begin a research report: 
Festinger’s theory of cognitive dissonance received a gr eat deal of attention during the la tter part of the 
20th century (p. 191) 
The following would be much better: 
The individual who holds t wo beliefs tha t are inconsistent with one another ma y feel uncomfortable. For 
example, the person who kno ws that they enjoy smoking but belie ves it to be unhe althy may experience 
discomfort arising from the inc onsistency or disharmony between these t wo thoughts or c ognitions. This 
feeling o f disc omfort w as c alled c ognitive dissonanc e b y social psy chologist Le on F estinger (1957), who 
suggested that individuals will be motivated to remove this dissonance in whatever way they can (p. 191). 
After capturing the r eader’s attention, the opening should g o on to in troduce the r esearch question and 
explain why it is interesting. Will the answer fill a gap in the literature? Will it provide a test of an important 
theory? Does it have practical implications? Giving readers a clear sense of what the research is about and 
why they should c are about i t will motiv ate them to c ontinue reading the li terature review—and will help 
them make sense of it. 
 
Breaking the Rules 
Researcher Larry Jacoby reported several studies showing that a word that people see or hear repeatedly can 
seem more familiar even when they do not recall the repetitions—and that this tendency is especially 
pronounced among older adults. He opened his article with the following humorous anecdote: 
A friend whose mother is suffering symptoms of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) tells the story of taking her 
274  |  Writing a Research Report in American Psychological Association (APA) Stylemother to visit a nursing home, preliminary to her mother’s moving there. During an orientation meeting 
at the nursing home, the rules and regulations were explained, one of which regarded the dining room. 
The dining room was described as similar to a fine restaurant except that tipping was not required. The 
absence of tipping was a central theme in the orientation lecture, mentioned frequently to emphasize the 
quality of care along with the advantages of having paid in advance. At the end of the meeting, the friend’s 
mother was asked whether she had any questions. She replied that she only had one question: “Should I 
tip?” (Jacoby, 1999, p. 3) 
Although both humor and personal anecdotes are generally discouraged in APA-style writing, this example is a 
highly effective way to start because it both engages the reader and provides an excellent real-world example 
of the topic under study. 
The Literature Review 
Immediately after the opening comes the literature review, which describes relevant previous research on 
the topic and c an be anywhere from several paragraphs to several pages in length. However, the literature 
review is not simpl y a list o f past studies. I nstead, it constitutes a kind o f argument for why the r esearch 
question is w orth addr essing. B y the end o f the li terature r eview, r eaders should be c onvinced tha t the 
research question mak es sense and tha t the pr esent study is a log ical next step in the ong oing research 
process. 
Like any effective argument, the literature review must have some kind of structure. For example, it might 
begin by describing a phenomenon in a g eneral way along wi th several studies tha t demonstrate it, then 
describing two or more competing theories of the phenomenon, and finally presenting a hypothesis to test 
one or mor e of the the ories. Or i t might describe one phenomenon, then descri be another phenomenon 
that seems inconsistent with the first one, then propose a theory that resolves the inconsistency, and finally 
present a h ypothesis to test tha t theory. In applied research, it might describe a phenomenon or the ory, 
then describe how that phenomenon or the ory applies to some impor tant real-world situation, and finally 
suggest a way to test whether it does, in fact, apply to that situation. 
Looking at the literature review in this way emphasizes a few things. First, it is extremely important to start 
with an outline o f the main poin ts that you want to mak e, organized in the or der that you want to mak e 
them. The basic struc ture of your argument, then, should be appar ent from the outline i tself. Second, it is 
important to emphasize the structure of your argument in your writing. One way to do this is to beg in the 
literature review by summarizing y our argument even before you beg in to mak e i t. “In this ar ticle, I will 
describe two apparently contradictory phenomena, present a new theory that has the poten tial to resolve 
the apparent contradiction, and finall y present a no vel hypothesis to test the the ory.” Another w ay is to 
open each paragraph with a sentence that summarizes the main poin t of the paragraph and links i t to the 
preceding points. These opening sentences provide the “transitions” that many beginning researchers have 
difficulty with. Instead of beginning a paragraph by launching into a description of a previous study, such as 
“Williams (2004) found that…,” it is better to start by indicating something about why you are describing this 
particular study. Here are some simple examples: 
Writing a Research Report in American Psychological Association (APA) Style  |  275Another example of this phenomenon comes from the work of Williams (2004). 
Williams (2004) offers one explanation of this phenomenon. 
An alternative perspective has been provided by Williams (2004). 
We used a method based on the one used by Williams (2004). 
Finally, remember that your goal is to construct an argument for why your research question is interesting 
and w orth addr essing—not ne cessarily wh y y our fa vorite answ er to i t is c orrect. I n other w ords, y our 
literature r eview must be balanc ed. I f y ou w ant to emphasiz e the g enerality o f a phenomenon, then o f 
course you should discuss various studies that have demonstrated it. However, if there are other studies that 
have failed to demonstr ate it, you should discuss them too. Or if y ou are proposing a ne w theory, then o f 
course you should discuss findings that are consistent with that theory. However, if there are other findings 
that are inconsistent with it, again, you should discuss them too. It is acceptable to argue that the balance of 
the research supports the existence of a phenomenon or is consistent with a theory (and that is usually the 
best that researchers in psychology can hope for), but it is not acceptable to ignore contradictory evidence. 
Besides, a large part of what makes a research question interesting is uncertainty about its answer. 
The Closing 
The closing of the in troduction—typically the final par agraph or t wo—usually includes t wo impor tant 
elements. The first is a clear statement of the main research question and hypothesis. This statement tends 
to be more formal and precise than in the opening and is often expressed in terms of operational definitions 
of the key variables. The second is a brief overview of the method and some comment on its appropriateness. 
Here, for example, is ho w Darley and L atané (1968)2 concluded the in troduction to their classic ar ticle on 
the bystander effect: 
These considerations lead to the hypothesis that the more bystanders to an emergency, the less likely, 
or the mor e slowly, any one b ystander will intervene to pr ovide aid. To test this pr oposition it would 
be necessary to create a situation in which a realistic “emergency” could plausibly occur. Each subject 
should also be blocked from communicating with others to prevent his getting information about their 
behavior during the emergency. Finally, the experimental situation should allow for the assessment of 
the speed and fr equency of the subje cts’ reaction to the emer gency. The e xperiment reported below 
attempted to fulfill these conditions. (p. 378) 
Thus the introduction leads smoothly into the next major section of the article—the method section. 
Method 
The method section is wher e y ou descri be ho w y ou c onducted y our stud y. An impor tant principle f or 
writing a me thod se ction is tha t i t should be cle ar and de tailed enoug h tha t other r esearchers c ould 
276  |  Writing a Research Report in American Psychological Association (APA) Stylereplicate the study by following your “recipe.” This means that it must describe all the impor tant elements 
of the stud y—basic demogr aphic char acteristics o f the par ticipants, ho w the y w ere r ecruited, whe ther 
they w ere r andomly assigne d to c onditions, ho w the v ariables w ere manipula ted or me asured, ho w 
counterbalancing was accomplished, and so on. A t the same time, i t should avoid irrelevant details such as 
the fact that the stud y was conducted in Classr oom 37B of the I ndustrial Technology Building or tha t the 
questionnaire was double-sided and completed using pencils. 
The me thod se ction beg ins imme diately af ter the in troduction ends wi th the he ading “M ethod” ( not 
“Methods”) centered on the pag e. Immediately after this is the subhe ading “Participants,” left justified and 
in italics. The par ticipants subsection indicates how many participants there were, the number o f women 
and men, some indication of their age, other demographics that may be relevant to the study, and how they 
were recruited, including any incentives given for participation. 
Figure 11.1 Three Ways of Organizing an APA-Style Method. [Image description] 
After the participants section, the structure can vary a bit. Figure 11.1 shows three common approaches. In 
the first, the par ticipants section is f ollowed by a design and pr ocedure subsection, which descri bes the 
rest of the method. This works well for methods that are relatively simple and can be described adequately 
in a f ew paragraphs. In the se cond approach, the par ticipants section is f ollowed by separate design and 
Writing a Research Report in American Psychological Association (APA) Style  |  277procedure subsections. This works well when both the design and the procedure are relatively complicated 
and each requires multiple paragraphs. 
What is the dif ference between design and pr ocedure? The design o f a study is its overall structure. What 
were the independent and dependent variables? Was the independent variable manipulated, and if so, w as 
it manipulated between or wi thin subjects? How were the v ariables operationally defined? The pr ocedure 
is ho w the stud y w as c arried out. I t o ften w orks w ell to descri be the pr ocedure in terms o f wha t the 
participants did r ather than wha t the r esearchers did. F or example, the par ticipants gave their inf ormed 
consent, read a se t of instructions, completed a block o f four practice trials, c ompleted a block o f 20 test 
trials, completed two questionnaires, and were debriefed and excused. 
In the third basic way to organize a method section, the participants subsection is followed by a materials 
subsection bef ore the design and pr ocedure subse ctions. This w orks w ell when ther e ar e c omplicated 
materials to descri be. This mig ht me an multiple questionnair es, wri tten vigne ttes tha t par ticipants r ead 
and respond to, perceptual stimuli, and so on. The he ading of this subsection can be modified to reflect its 
content. Instead of “Materials,” it can be “Questionnaires,” “Stimuli,” and so on. The ma terials subsection is 
also a good place to refer to the reliability and/or validity of the measures. This is where you would present 
test-retest correlations, Cronbach’s α, or other sta tistics to sho w that the me asures are consistent across 
time and across items and that they accurately measure what they are intended to measure. 
Results 
The results section is where you present the main results of the study, including the results of the statistical 
analyses. Althoug h i t does not include the r aw da ta—individual par ticipants’ r esponses or 
scores—researchers should save their raw data and make them available to other researchers who request 
them. Many journals encourage the open sharing o f raw data online, and some no w require open data and 
materials before publication. 
Although ther e ar e no standar d subse ctions, i t is still impor tant f or the r esults se ction to be log ically 
organized. Typically it begins with certain preliminary issues. One is whether any participants or responses 
were excluded from the analyses and why. The rationale for excluding data should be descri bed clearly so 
that other r esearchers can decide whether i t is appr opriate. A se cond preliminary issue is ho w multiple 
responses were c ombined to pr oduce the primar y variables in the anal yses. For e xample, if par ticipants 
rated the attractiveness of 20 stimulus people, you might have to explain that you began by computing the 
mean attractiveness rating for each participant. Or if they recalled as many items as they could from study 
list of 20 words, did you count the number correctly recalled, compute the percentage correctly recalled, or 
perhaps compute the number correct minus the number incorrect? A final preliminary issue is whether the 
manipulation was successful. This is where you would report the results of any manipulation checks. 
The results section should then tackle the primar y research questions, one a t a time. Again, ther e should 
be a cle ar organization. One appr oach would be to answ er the most g eneral questions and then pr oceed 
to answ er mor e spe cific ones. Another w ould be to answ er the main question first and then to answ er 
278  |  Writing a Research Report in American Psychological Association (APA) Stylesecondary ones. R egardless, Bem (2003 )3 suggests the f ollowing basic struc ture for discussing e ach new 
result: 
• Remind the reader of the research question. 
• Give the answer to the research question in words. 
• Present the relevant statistics. 
• Qualify the answer if necessary. 
• Summarize the result. 
Notice that only Step 3 necessarily involves numbers. The rest of the steps involve presenting the research 
question and the answer to it in words. In fact, the basic results should be clear even to a reader who skips 
over the numbers. 
Discussion 
The discussion is the last major se ction o f the r esearch r eport. Discussions usuall y c onsist o f some 
combination of the following elements: 
• Summary of the research 
• Theoretical implications 
• Practical implications 
• Limitations 
• Suggestions for future research 
The discussion t ypically begins with a summar y of the stud y that provides a cle ar answer to the r esearch 
question. In a shor t report wi th a sing le study, this mig ht require no mor e than a sen tence. In a long er 
report with multiple studies, i t might require a par agraph or e ven two. The summar y is o ften followed by 
a discussion of the theoretical implications of the research. Do the results provide support for any existing 
theories? If not, how can they be explained? Although you do not have to provide a definitive explanation or 
detailed theory for your results, you at least need to outline one or mor e possible explanations. In applied 
research—and often in basic r esearch—there is also some discussion o f the pr actical implic ations of the 
research. How can the results be used, and by whom, to accomplish some real-world goal? 
The the oretical and pr actical implic ations ar e o ften f ollowed b y a discussion o f the stud y’s limi tations. 
Perhaps there are problems wi th i ts internal or e xternal validity. Perhaps the manipula tion was not v ery 
effective or the me asures not v ery reliable. Perhaps there is some e vidence that participants did not full y 
understand their task or tha t the y w ere suspicious o f the in tent o f the r esearchers. N ow is the time to 
discuss these issues and ho w they might have affected the r esults. But do not o verdo it. All studies ha ve 
limitations, and most r eaders will understand tha t a dif ferent sample or dif ferent me asures mig ht ha ve 
produced dif ferent r esults. Unless ther e is g ood r eason to think the y would have, ho wever, ther e is no 
reason to mention these routine issues. Instead, pick two or three limitations that seem like they could have 
Writing a Research Report in American Psychological Association (APA) Style  |  279influenced the r esults, explain how they could have influenced the r esults, and sugg est ways to de al with 
them. 
Most discussions end wi th some suggestions for future research. If the study did not sa tisfactorily answer 
the original research question, what will it take to do so? What new research questions has the study raised? 
This part of the discussion, however, is not just a list o f new questions. It is a discussion o f two or three of 
the most important unresolved issues. This means identifying and clarifying each question, suggesting some 
alternative answers, and even suggesting ways they could be studied. 
Finally, some r esearchers ar e qui te g ood a t ending their ar ticles wi th a sw eeping or thoug ht-provoking 
conclusion. Darley and Latané (1968)4, for example, ended their article on the bystander effect by discussing 
the idea that whether people help others ma y depend mor e on the si tuation than on their personali ties. 
Their final sen tence is, “I f pe ople understand the si tuational f orces tha t c an mak e them hesi tate to 
intervene, they may better overcome them” (p. 383). However, this kind of ending can be difficult to pull off. 
It can sound o verreaching or just banal and end up de tracting from the o verall impact of the ar ticle. It is 
often better simply to end by returning to the problem or issue introduced in your opening paragraph and 
clearly stating how your research has addressed that issue or problem. 
References 
The references section begins on a new page with the heading “References” centered at the top of the page. 
All references cited in the text are then listed in the format presented earlier. They are listed alphabetically 
by the last name of the first author. If two sources have the same first author, they are listed alphabetically by 
the last name of the second author. If all the authors are the same, then they are listed chronologically by the 
year of publication. Everything in the reference list is double-spaced both within and between references. 
Appendices, Tables, and Figures 
Appendices, tables, and figur es c ome af ter the r eferences. An appendix is appr opriate f or supplemen tal 
material that would interrupt the flo w of the r esearch report if i t were presented within any of the major 
sections. An appendix c ould be use d to pr esent lists o f stimulus w ords, questionnair e i tems, de tailed 
descriptions o f spe cial e quipment or unusual sta tistical anal yses, or r eferences to the studies tha t ar e 
included in a me ta-analysis. Each appendix beg ins on a ne w pag e. I f ther e is onl y one, the he ading is 
“Appendix,” c entered a t the top o f the pag e. I f ther e is mor e than one, the he adings ar e “ Appendix A,” 
“Appendix B,” and so on, and they appear in the order they were first mentioned in the text of the report. 
After any appendices come tables and then figur es. Tables and figur es are both use d to pr esent results. 
Figures can also be used to display graphs, illustrate theories (e.g., in the form of a flowchart), display stimuli, 
outline procedures, and present many other kinds of information. Each table and figure appears on its own 
page. Tables are numbered in the or der that they are first men tioned in the te xt (“Table 1,” “Table 2,” and 
280  |  Writing a Research Report in American Psychological Association (APA) Styleso on). Figures are numbered the same way (“Figure 1,” “Figure 2,” and so on). A brief explanatory title, with 
the important words capitalized, appears above each table. Each figure is given a brief explanatory caption, 
where (aside from proper nouns or names) only the first word of each sentence is capitalized. More details 
on preparing APA-style tables and figures are presented later in the book. 
Sample APA-Style Research Report 
Figures 11.2, 11.3, 11.4, and 11.5 sho w some sample pag es fr om an AP A-style empiric al r esearch r eport 
originally written by undergraduate student Tomoe Suyama at California State University, Fresno. The main 
purpose o f these figur es is to illustr ate the basic or ganization and f ormatting o f an AP A-style empiric al 
research report, although many high-level and low-level style conventions can be seen here too. 
Writing a Research Report in American Psychological Association (APA) Style  |  281Figure 11.2 Title Page and Abstract. This student paper does not include the author note on 
the title page. The abstract appears on its own page. 
 
282  |  Writing a Research Report in American Psychological Association (APA) StyleFigure 11.3 Introduction and Method. Note that the introduction is headed with the full title, 
and the method section begins immediately after the introduction ends. 
Writing a Research Report in American Psychological Association (APA) Style  |  283Figure 11.4 Results and Discussion The discussion begins immediately after the results 
section ends. 
284  |  Writing a Research Report in American Psychological Association (APA) StyleFigure 11.5 References and Figure. If there were appendices or tables, they would come 
before the figure. 
Image Description 
Figure 11.1 image description: Table showing three ways of organizing an APA-style method section. 
Writing a Research Report in American Psychological Association (APA) Style  |  285In the simple me thod, ther e ar e t wo subhe adings: “P articipants” ( which mig ht beg in “ The par ticipants 
were…”) and “Design and procedure” (which might begin “There were three conditions…”). 
In the t ypical me thod, ther e ar e thr ee subhe adings: “P articipants” (“ The par ticipants w ere…”), “Design ” 
(“There were three conditions…”), and “Pr ocedure” (“Participants viewed each stimulus on the c omputer 
screen…”). 
In the c omplex method, there are four subheadings: “Participants” (“The participants were…”), “Materials” 
(“The stimuli w ere…”), “Design” (“ There w ere thr ee c onditions…”), and “Pr ocedure” (“P articipants vie wed 
each stimulus on the computer screen…”). [Return to Figure 11.1] 
Notes 
1. Bem, D. J. (2003). Writing the empirical journal article. In J. M. Darley, M. P. Zanna, & H. R. Roediger III (Eds.), The 
complete academic: A practical guide for the beginning social scientist (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association. 
2. Darley, J. M., & Latané, B. (1968). Bystander intervention in emergencies: Diffusion of responsibility. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 4, 377–383. 
3. Bem, D. J. (2003). Writing the empirical journal article. In J. M. Darley, M. P. Zanna, & H. R. Roediger III (Eds.), The 
complete academic: A practical guide for the beginning social scientist (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association. 
4. Darley, J. M., & Latané, B. (1968). Bystander intervention in emergencies: Diffusion of responsibility. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 4, 377–383. 
286  |  Writing a Research Report in American Psychological Association (APA) Style50.  Other Presentation Formats 
Learning Objectives 
1. List several ways that researchers in psychology can present their research and the situations in which 
they might use them. 
2. Describe how final manuscripts differ from copy manuscripts in American Psychological Association 
(APA) style. 
3. Describe the purpose of talks and posters at professional conferences. 
4. Prepare a short conference-style talk and simple poster presentation. 
 
Writing an empiric al research report in Americ an Psychological Association (APA) style is onl y one way to 
present new research in psychology. In this section, we look at several other important ways. 
Other Types of Manuscripts 
The previous section focused on wri ting empiric al research reports to be submi tted for public ation in a 
professional journal. However, there are other kinds o f manuscripts that are written in APA style, many of 
which will not be submitted for publication elsewhere. Here we look at a few of them. 
Review and Theoretical Articles 
Recall tha t review articles summarize r esearch on a par ticular topic wi thout pr esenting ne w empiric al 
results. W hen these ar ticles present a ne w theory, they are often called theoretical articles. Review and 
theoretical ar ticles ar e struc tured much lik e empiric al r esearch r eports, wi th a ti tle pag e, an abstr act, 
references, appendixes, tables, and figures, and they are written in the same high-level and low-level style. 
Because they do not r eport the r esults of new empirical research, however, there is no me thod or r esults 
section. Of course, the body of the manuscript should still have a logical organization and include an opening 
that identifies the topic and e xplains its importance, a li terature review that organizes previous research 
(identifying important relationships among concepts or gaps in the li terature), and a closing or c onclusion 
that summarizes the main conclusions and suggests directions for further research or discusses theoretical 
and practical implications. In a theoretical article, of course, much of the body of the manuscript is devoted 
to presenting the ne w theory. Theoretical and r eview articles are usually divided into sections, each with 
Other Presentation Formats  |  287a heading that is appropriate to that section. The sections and headings can vary considerably from article 
to ar ticle (unlike in an empiric al r esearch r eport). B ut wha tever the y ar e, the y should help or ganize the 
manuscript and make the argument clear. 
Final Manuscripts 
Until now, we have focused on the formatting of manuscripts that will be submitted to a professional journal 
for publication. In contrast, other types of manuscripts are prepared by the author in their final f orm with 
no intention of submitting them for publication elsewhere. These are called final manuscripts and include 
dissertations, theses, and other student papers. These manuscripts may look different from strictly APA style 
manuscripts in ways that make them easier to read, such as putting tables and figures close to where they 
are discussed so that the reader does not have to flip to the back of the manuscript to see them. If you read 
a dissertation or thesis, f or example, you might notice it does not adher e strictly to APA style formatting. 
For studen t papers, i t is impor tant to che ck wi th the c ourse instruc tor about f ormatting spe cifics. I n a 
research methods course, papers are usually required to be written as though they were manuscripts being 
submitted for publication. 
Conference Presentations 
One of the w ays that researchers in psy chology share their r esearch wi th each other is b y presenting i t 
at professional conferences. ( Although some pr ofessional c onferences in psy chology ar e de voted mainl y 
to issues o f clinic al pr actice, w e ar e c oncerned her e wi th those tha t f ocus on r esearch.) Pr ofessional 
conferences c an r ange fr om small-sc ale e vents in volving a doz en r esearchers who g et tog ether f or an 
afternoon to lar ge-scale e vents involving thousands o f researchers who me et f or se veral days. Althoug h 
researchers attending a professional conference are likely to discuss their work with each other informally, 
there are two more formal types of presentation: oral presentations (“talks”) and posters. Presenting a talk or 
poster at a conference usually requires submitting an abstract of the research to the conference organizers 
in advance and ha ving i t accepted for presentation—although the pe er review process is t ypically not as 
rigorous as it is for manuscripts submitted to a professional journal. 
Oral Presentations 
In an oral presentation, or “talk,” the presenter stands in front of an audience of other researchers and tells 
them about their r esearch—usually with the help o f a slide sho w. Talks usually last from 10 to 20 minutes, 
with the last few minutes reserved for questions from the audience. At larger conferences, talks are typically 
grouped into sessions lasting an hour or two in which all the talks are on the same general topic. 
In preparing a talk, pr esenters should keep several general principles in mind. The first is tha t the number 
288  |  Other Presentation Formatsof slides should be no mor e than about one per minute o f the talk. The se cond is tha t talks ar e generally 
structured like an APA-style research report. There is a slide with the title and authors, a few slides to help 
provide the backgr ound, a f ew more to help descri be the me thod, a f ew for the r esults, and a f ew for the 
conclusions. The thir d is tha t the pr esenter should look a t the a udience members and spe ak to them in a 
conversational tone that is less f ormal than APA-style writing but more formal than a c onversation with a 
friend. The slides should not be the f ocus of the presentation; they should act as visual aids. As such, the y 
should present the main points in bulleted lists or simple tables and figures. 
Posters 
Another way to present research at a conference is in the f orm of a poster. A poster is t ypically presented 
during a one- to two-hour poster session that takes place in a large room at the conference site. Presenters 
set up their posters on bulle tin boards arranged around the room and stand near them. Other researchers 
then circulate through the room, read the posters, and talk to the presenters. In essence, poster sessions are 
a grown-up version of the school science fair. But there is nothing childish about them. Posters are used by 
professional researchers in all scientific disciplines and they are becoming increasingly common. At a recent 
American Psychological Association Conference, ne arly 2,000 posters w ere presented across 16 separ ate 
poster sessions. Among the r easons posters ar e so popular is tha t they encourage meaningful interaction 
among researchers. 
Posters ar e t ypically a lar ge siz e, ma ybe f our f eet wide and thr ee f eet hig h. The poster’ s inf ormation is 
organized into distinct sections, including a ti tle, author names and af filiations, an introduction, a method 
section, a results section, a discussion or conclusions section, references, and acknowledgments. Although 
posters c an include an abstr act, this ma y not be ne cessary be cause the poster i tself is alr eady a brief 
summary of the r esearch. Figure 11.6 shows two different ways that the inf ormation on a poster mig ht be 
organized. 
Other Presentation Formats  |  289Figure 11.6 Two Possible Ways to Organize the Information on a Poster. [Image 
description] 
Given the conditions under which posters ar e often presented—for example, in crowded ballrooms where 
people are also eating, drinking, and socializing—they should be constructed so that they present the main 
ideas behind the r esearch in as simple and cle ar a w ay as possi ble. The f ont sizes on a poster should be 
large—perhaps 72 points for the ti tle and authors’ names and 28 poin ts for the main te xt. The information 
should be organized into sections with clear headings, and text should be blocked into sentences or bulleted 
points rather than paragraphs. It is also better for it to be organized in columns and flow from top to bottom 
rather than to be or ganized in r ows that flow across the poster . This mak es it easier for multiple pe ople 
to read at the same time wi thout bumping into each other. Posters often include elements that add visual 
290  |  Other Presentation Formatsinterest. Figures can be more colorful than those in an APA-style manuscript. Posters can also include copies 
of visual stimuli, photogr aphs of the apparatus, or a simula tion of participants being tested. They can also 
include purely decorative elements, although it is best not to overdo these. 
Again, a primar y r eason tha t posters ar e be coming such a popular w ay to pr esent r esearch is tha t the y 
facilitate interaction among r esearchers. Many presenters immediately offer to descri be their r esearch to 
visitors and use the poster as a visual aid. A t the very least, it is important for presenters to stand by their 
posters, greet visitors, offer to answ er questions, and be pr epared for questions and e ven the oc casional 
critical c omment. I t is g enerally a g ood ide a to ha ve a mor e de tailed wri te-up o f the r esearch a vailable 
for visitors who w ant more information, to o ffer to send them a de tailed write-up, or to pr ovide contact 
information so that they can request more information later. 
For mor e inf ormation on pr eparing and pr esenting both talks and posters, se e the w ebsite o f the 
Undergraduate Ad vising and R esearch Of fice a t Dartmouth Colleg e: http://www.dartmouth.edu/~ugar/
undergrad/posterinstructions.html 
 
Professional Conferences 
Following are links to the websites for several large national conferences in North America and also for several 
conferences that feature the work of undergraduate students. For a comprehensive list of psychology 
conferences worldwide, see the following website. 
http://www.conferencealerts.com/psychology.htm 
Large Conferences 
Canadian Psychological Association Convention: http://www.cpa.ca/convention 
American Psychological Association Convention: http://www.apa.org/convention 
Association for Psychological Science Conference: http://www.psychologicalscience.org/index.php/
convention 
Canadian Society for Brain, Behavior, and Cognitive Science Annual Meeting: https://www.csbbcs.org/
meetings 
Society for Personality and Social Psychology Conference: http://meeting.spsp.org/ 
Psychonomic Society Annual Meeting: http://www.psychonomic.org/annual-meeting 
U.S. Regional conferences where undergraduate researchers frequently present 
Eastern Psychological Association (EPA): http://www.easternpsychological.org 
Other Presentation Formats  |  291Midwestern Psychological Association (MPA): http://www.midwesternpsych.org/ 
New England Psychological Association (NEPA): http://www.newenglandpsychological.org/ 
Rocky Mountain Psychological Association (RMPA): http://www.rockymountainpsych.com/ 
Southeastern Psychological Association (SEPA): http://www.sepaonline.com/ 
Southwestern Psychological Association (SWPA): http://www.swpsych.org/ 
Western Psychological Association (WPA): http://westernpsych.org/ 
Canadian Undergraduate Conferences 
Connecting Minds Undergraduate Research Conference: http://www.connectingminds.ca 
Science Atlantic Psychology Conference: https://scienceatlantic.ca/conferences/ 
Image Description 
Figure 11.6 image description: Two graphics depicting ways to organize the information on a poster. 
In the first gr aphic, the abstr act and the ti tle and a uthors appear along the top o f the poster . Below the 
abstract and title are four columns. From top to bottom, left to right, the columns contain the introduction 
and method; Table 1 and a figure; Table 2 and the results; and the conclusions and reference section. 
In the se cond graphic, the ti tle and a uthors appear along the top o f the poster . Below the ti tle are three 
columns. From top to bottom, left to right, the columns contain the introduction and method; a figure and 
acknowledgments; and the conclusions and references. [Return to Figure 11.6] 
292  |  Other Presentation Formats51.  Key Takeaways and Exercises 
Key Takeaways 
• APA style is a set of guidelines for writing in psychology. It is the genre of writing that psychologists use 
to communicate about their research with other researchers and practitioners. 
• APA style can be seen as having three levels. There is the organization of a research article, the high-level 
style that includes writing in a formal and straightforward way, and the low-level style that consists of 
many specific rules of grammar, spelling, formatting of references, and so on. 
• References and reference citations are an important part of APA style. There are specific rules for 
formatting references and for citing them in the text of an article. 
• An APA-style empirical research report consists of several standard sections. The main ones are the 
abstract, introduction, method, results, discussion, and references. 
• The introduction consists of an opening that presents the research question, a literature review that 
describes previous research on the topic, and a closing that restates the research question and 
comments on the method. The literature review constitutes an argument for why the current study is 
worth doing. 
• The method section describes the method in enough detail that another researcher could replicate the 
study. At a minimum, it consists of a participants subsection and a design and procedure subsection. 
• The results section describes the results in an organized fashion. Each primary result is presented in 
terms of statistical results but also explained in words. 
• The discussion typically summarizes the study, discusses theoretical and practical implications and 
limitations of the study, and offers suggestions for further research. 
• Research in psychology can be presented in several different formats. In addition to APA-style empirical 
research reports, there are theoretical and review articles; final manuscripts, including dissertations, 
theses, and student papers; and talks and posters at professional conferences. 
• Talks and posters at professional conferences follow some APA style guidelines but are considerably less 
detailed than APA-style research reports. Their function is to present new research to interested 
researchers and facilitate further interaction among researchers. 
Exercises 
• Practice: Find a description of a research study in a popular magazine, newspaper, blog, or website. Then 
identify five specific differences between how that description is written and how it would be written in 
APA style. 
• Practice: Find and correct the errors in the following fictional APA-style references and citations. 
◦ Walters, F. T., and DeLeon, M. (2010). Relationship Between Intrinsic Motivation and Accuracy of 
Key Takeaways and Exercises  |  293