CHAPTER  XII 
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS 
At this poin t, we need to c onsider the basics o f data analysis in psy chological research in mor e detail. In 
this chapter, we focus on descriptive statistics—a set of techniques for summarizing and displaying the data 
from your sample. W e look first a t some o f the most c ommon techniques for describing single variables, 
followed by some of the most common techniques for describing statistical relationships between variables. 
We then look a t how to pr esent descriptive statistics in wri ting and also in the f orm of tables and gr aphs 
that would be appr opriate for an Americ an Psychological Association (APA)-style research report. We end 
with some practical advice for organizing and carrying out your analyses. 
Descriptive Statistics  |  29552.  Describing Single Variables 
Learning Objectives 
1. Use frequency tables and histograms to display and interpret the distribution of a variable. 
2. Compute and interpret the mean, median, and mode of a distribution and identify situations in which the 
mean, median, or mode is the most appropriate measure of central tendency. 
3. Compute and interpret the range and standard deviation of a distribution. 
4. Compute and interpret percentile ranks and z scores. 
 
Descriptive statistics refers to a set of techniques for summarizing and displaying data. Let us assume here 
that the da ta ar e quan titative and c onsist o f sc ores on one or mor e v ariables f or e ach o f se veral stud y 
participants. Althoug h in most c ases the primar y research question will be about one or mor e statistical 
relationships between variables, it is also impor tant to descri be each variable individually. For this reason, 
we begin by looking at some of the most common techniques for describing single variables. 
The Distribution of a Variable 
Every v ariable has a  distribution, which is the w ay the sc ores ar e distri buted acr oss the le vels o f tha t 
variable. For example, in a sample o f 100 univ ersity students, the distri bution of the v ariable “number of 
siblings” might be such that 10 of them have no siblings, 30 have one sibling, 40 have two siblings, and so on. 
In the same sample, the distribution of the variable “sex” might be such that 44 have a score of “male” and 56 
have a score of “female.” 
Frequency Tables 
One w ay to displa y the distri bution o f a v ariable is in a  frequency table. Table 12.1, f or e xample, is a 
frequency table sho wing a h ypothetical distri bution o f sc ores on the R osenberg Self -Esteem Sc ale f or a 
sample of 40 college students. The first c olumn lists the v alues of the variable—the possible scores on the 
Rosenberg scale—and the second column lists the frequency of each score. This table shows that there were 
three students who had self-esteem scores of 24, five who had self-esteem scores of 23, and so on. F rom a 
frequency table like this, one can quickly see several important aspects of a distribution, including the range 
Describing Single Variables  |  297of scores (from 15 to 24), the most and least common scores (22 and 17, respectively), and any extreme scores 
that stand out from the rest. 
 
Table 12.1 Frequency Table 
Showing a Hypothetical 
Distribution of Scores on 
the Rosenberg Self-Esteem 
Scale 
Self-esteem Frequency 
24 3 
23 5 
22 10 
21 8 
20 5 
19 3 
18 3 
17 0 
16 2 
15 1 
 
There are a few other points worth noting about frequency tables. First, the levels listed in the first column 
usually go from the highest at the top to the lo west at the bottom, and they usually do not e xtend beyond 
the highest and lo west scores in the da ta. For example, although scores on the R osenberg scale can vary 
from a high of 30 to a lo w of 0, Table 12.1 only includes levels from 24 to 15 be cause that range includes all 
the scores in this particular data set. Second, when there are many different scores across a wide range of 
values, it is often better to create a grouped frequency table, in which the first column lists ranges of values 
and the se cond column lists the fr equency of scores in e ach range. Table 12.2, f or example, is a gr ouped 
frequency table showing a hypothetical distribution of simple reaction times for a sample of 20 participants. 
In a grouped frequency table, the ranges must all be of equal width, and there are usually between five and 
15 of them. Finally, frequency tables can also be use d for categorical variables, in which c ase the levels are 
category labels. The or der of the c ategory labels is some what arbitrary, but they are often listed from the 
most frequent at the top to the least frequent at the bottom. 
 
298  |  Describing Single VariablesTable 12.2 A Grouped Frequency 
Table Showing a Hypothetical 
Distribution of Reaction Times 
Reaction time (ms) Frequency 
241–260 1 
221–240 2 
201–220 2 
181–200 9 
161–180 4 
141–160 2 
Histograms 
A histogram is a gr aphical display of a distri bution. It presents the same inf ormation as a fr equency table 
but in a way that is even quicker and easier to grasp. The histogram in Figure 12.1 presents the distribution 
of self -esteem sc ores in T able 12.1. The  x-axis o f the histogr am r epresents the v ariable and the  y-axis 
represents frequency. Above each level of the v ariable on the  x-axis is a v ertical bar tha t represents the 
number of individuals with that score. When the variable is quantitative, as in this example, there is usually 
no gap be tween the bars. W hen the v ariable is c ategorical, however, there is usuall y a small gap be tween 
them. (The gap at 17 in this histogram reflects the fact that there were no scores of 17 in this data set.) 
Figure 12.1 Histogram Showing the Distribution of Self-Esteem Scores Presented in Table 12.1 
Describing Single Variables  |  299Distribution Shapes 
When the distri bution of a quan titative variable is displa yed in a histogr am, it has a shape. The shape o f 
the distribution of self-esteem scores in Figure 12.1 is t ypical. There is a pe ak somewhere near the middle 
of the distribution and “tails” tha t taper in ei ther direction from the peak. The distribution of Figure 12.1 is 
unimodal, meaning it has one distinc t peak, but distri butions can also be bimodal, me aning they have two 
distinct peaks. Figure 12.2, f or example, shows a h ypothetical bimodal distri bution of scores on the Be ck 
Depression Inventory. Distributions can also have more than two distinct peaks, but these are relatively rare 
in psychological research. 
Figure 12.2 Histogram Showing a Hypothetical Bimodal Distribution of Scores on the Beck Depression Inventory. [Image 
description] 
Another characteristic of the shape of a distribution is whether it is symmetrical or skewed. The distribution 
in the c enter of Figure 12.3 is symmetrical. Its left and rig ht halves are mirror images of each other. The 
distribution on the lef t is negatively skewed, with its peak shifted toward the upper end o f its range and a 
relatively long negative tail. The distribution on the right is positively skewed, with its peak toward the lower 
end of its range and a relatively long positive tail. 
Figure 12.3 Histograms Showing Negatively Skewed, Symmetrical, and Positively Skewed Distributions 
300  |  Describing Single VariablesAn outlier is an extreme score that is much hig her or lower than the r est of the scores in the distri bution. 
Sometimes outliers r epresent truly extreme scores on the v ariable of interest. For example, on the Be ck 
Depression I nventory, a sing le clinic ally depr essed person mig ht be an outlier in a sample o f other wise 
happy and high-functioning peers. However, outliers can also represent errors or misunderstandings on the 
part of the researcher or participant, equipment malfunctions, or similar problems. We will say more about 
how to interpret outliers and what to do about them later in this chapter. 
Measures of Central Tendency and Variability 
It is also useful to be able to descri be the characteristics of a distri bution more precisely. Here we look at 
how to do this in terms of two important characteristics: their central tendency and their variability. 
Central Tendency 
The central tendency of a distribution is its middle—the point around which the sc ores in the distri bution 
tend to cluster. (Another term for central tendency is average.) Looking back at Figure 12.1, for example, we 
can see that the self-esteem scores tend to cluster around the values of 20 to 22. Here we will consider the 
three most common measures of central tendency: the mean, the median, and the mode. 
The mean of a distribution (symbolized M) is the sum of the scores divided by the number of scores. It is an 
average. As a formula, it looks like this: 
M=ΣX/N 
In this formula, the symbol Σ (the Greek letter sigma) is the summa tion sign and me ans to sum acr oss the 
values of the variable X. N represents the number of scores. The mean is by far the most common measure 
of central tendency, and there are some good reasons for this. It usually provides a good indication of the 
central tendency of a distri bution, and i t is e asily understood b y most pe ople. In addition, the me an has 
statistical properties that make it especially useful in doing inferential statistics. 
An alternative to the me an is the median. The median is the middle sc ore in the sense tha t half the sc ores 
in the distri bution are less than i t and half ar e greater than i t. The simplest w ay to find the me dian is to 
organize the sc ores from lowest to hig hest and loc ate the sc ore in the middle. Consider , for example, the 
following set of seven scores: 
8 4 12 14 3 2 3 
To find the median, simply rearrange the scores from lowest to highest and locate the one in the middle. 
2 3 3 4 8 12 14 
In this c ase, the me dian is 4 be cause there are three scores lower than 4 and thr ee scores higher than 4. 
Describing Single Variables  |  301When there is an even number of scores, there are two scores in the middle of the distribution, in which case 
the median is the value halfway between them. For example, if we were to add a score of 15 to the preceding 
data set, there would be two scores (both 4 and 8 ) in the middle o f the distribution, and the median would 
be halfway between them (6). 
One final measure of central tendency is the mode. The  mode is the most fr equent score in a distri bution. 
In the self -esteem distri bution presented in T able 12.1 and  Figure 12.1, for example, the mode is 22. M ore 
students had that score than any other. The mode is the onl y measure of central tendency that can also be 
used for categorical variables. 
In a distribution that is both unimodal and symme trical, the mean, median, and mode will be v ery close to 
each other at the peak of the distribution. In a bimodal or asymmetrical distribution, the mean, median, and 
mode can be qui te different. In a bimodal distri bution, the me an and me dian will tend to be be tween the 
peaks, while the mode will be a t the tallest pe ak. In a sk ewed distri bution, the me an will dif fer from the 
median in the dir ection of the sk ew (i.e., the dir ection of the long er tail). F or highly skewed distributions, 
the mean can be pulled so far in the direction of the skew that it is no longer a good measure of the central 
tendency of that distribution. Imagine, for example, a set of four simple reaction times of 200, 250, 280, and 
250 milliseconds (ms). The mean is 245 ms. But the addition of one more score of 5,000 ms—perhaps because 
the par ticipant was not pa ying attention—would raise the me an to 1,445 ms. N ot only is this me asure of 
central tendency greater than 80% of the scores in the distribution, but it also does not seem to represent 
the behavior of anyone in the distri bution very well. This is wh y researchers often prefer the me dian for 
highly skewed distributions (such as distributions of reaction times). 
Keep in mind, though, that you are not required to choose a single measure of central tendency in analyzing 
your data. Each one provides slightly different information, and all of them can be useful. 
Measures of Variability 
The variability of a distri bution is the e xtent to which the sc ores v ary ar ound their c entral tendenc y. 
Consider the t wo distri butions in  Figure 12.4, both o f which ha ve the same c entral tendency. The me an, 
median, and mode of each distribution are 10. Notice, however, that the two distributions differ in terms of 
their variability. The top one has r elatively low variability, with all the sc ores relatively close to the c enter. 
The bottom one has relatively high variability, with the scores are spread across a much greater range. 
 
302  |  Describing Single VariablesFigure 12.4 Histograms Showing Hypothetical Distributions With the Same Mean, Median, and Mode (10) but With Low 
Variability (Top) and High Variability (Bottom). [Image description] 
One simple me asure o f v ariability is the  range, which is simpl y the dif ference be tween the hig hest and 
lowest sc ores in the distri bution. The r ange o f the self -esteem sc ores in  Table 12.1, f or e xample, is the 
difference between the highest score (24) and the lowest score (15). That is, the range is 24 − 15 = 9. Although 
the range is e asy to c ompute and understand, i t can be misle ading when ther e are outliers. I magine, for 
example, an exam on which all the students scored between 90 and 100. It has a range of 10. But if there was 
Describing Single Variables  |  303a single student who scored 20, the range would increase to 80—giving the impression that the scores were 
quite variable when in fact only one student differed substantially from the rest. 
By far the most c ommon me asure o f v ariability is the standar d de viation. The standard deviation of a 
distribution is the average distance between the scores and the mean. For example, the standard deviations 
of the distributions in Figure 12.4 are 1.69 for the top distribution and 4.30 for the bottom one. That is, while 
the scores in the top distri bution differ from the me an by about 1. 69 units on a verage, the sc ores in the 
bottom distribution differ from the mean by about 4.30 units on average. 
Computing the standar d de viation in volves a slig ht c omplication. S pecifically, i t in volves finding the 
difference between each score and the mean, squaring each difference, finding the me an of these squared 
differences, and finally finding the square root of that mean. The formula looks like this: 
The computations for the standar d deviation are illustrated for a small se t of data in Table 12.3. The first 
column is a se t of eig ht scores that has a me an of 5. The se cond column is the dif ference between each 
score and the me an. The thir d c olumn is the squar e o f e ach o f these dif ferences. N otice tha t althoug h 
the dif ferences c an be nega tive, the squar ed dif ferences are always posi tive—meaning that the standar d 
deviation is al ways posi tive. A t the bot tom o f the thir d c olumn is the me an o f the squar ed dif ferences, 
which is also called the variance (symbolized SD2). Although the variance is itself a measure of variability, it 
generally plays a larger role in inferential statistics than in descriptive statistics. Finally, below the variance 
is the square root of the variance, which is the standard deviation. 
 
Table 12.3 Computations for 
the Standard Deviation 
X X – M (X − M)2 
3 −2 4 
5 0 0 
4 −1 1 
2 −3 9 
7 2 4 
6 1 1 
5 0 0 
8 3 9 
M = 5 SD2=28/8=3.50 
SD=√3.50=1.87 
304  |  Describing Single VariablesN or N − 1 
If you have already taken a statistics course, you may have learned to divide the sum of the squared differences 
by N − 1 rather than by N when you compute the variance and standard deviation. Why is this? 
By definition, the standard deviation is the square root of the mean of the squared differences. This implies 
dividing the sum of squared differences by N, as in the formula just presented. Computing the standard 
deviation this way is appropriate when your goal is simply to describe the variability in a sample. And learning it 
this way emphasizes that the variance is in fact the mean of the squared differences—and the standard 
deviation is the square root of this mean. 
However, most calculators and software packages divide the sum of squared differences by N − 1. This is 
because the standard deviation of a sample tends to be a bit lower than the standard deviation of the 
population the sample was selected from. Dividing the sum of squares by N − 1 corrects for this tendency and 
results in a better estimate of the population standard deviation. Because researchers generally think of their 
data as representing a sample selected from a larger population—and because they are generally interested in 
drawing conclusions about the population—it makes sense to routinely apply this correction. 
Percentile Ranks and z Scores 
In man y si tuations, i t is useful to ha ve a w ay to descri be the loc ation o f an individual sc ore wi thin i ts 
distribution. One approach is the percentile rank. The percentile rank of a score is the percentage of scores 
in the distri bution that are lower than that score. Consider, for example, the distri bution in Table 12.1. For 
any sc ore in the distri bution, w e c an find i ts per centile r ank b y c ounting the number o f sc ores in the 
distribution that are lower than that score and converting that number to a percentage of the total number 
of scores. Notice, for example, that five of the students represented by the data in Table 12.1 had self-esteem 
scores of 23. In this distribution, 32 of the 40 sc ores (80%) are lower than 23. Thus each of these students 
has a percentile rank of 80. (It can also be said that they scored “at the 80th percentile.”) Percentile ranks are 
often used to report the results of standardized tests of ability or achievement. If your percentile rank on a 
test of verbal ability were 40, for example, this would mean that you scored higher than 40% of the people 
who took the test. 
Another appr oach is the  z score. The  z scor e for a par ticular individual is the dif ference be tween tha t 
individual’s score and the mean of the distribution, divided by the standard deviation of the distribution: 
z = (X−M)/SD 
A z score indicates how far abo ve or belo w the me an a r aw score is, but i t expresses this in terms o f the 
standard deviation. For example, in a distribution of intelligence quotient (IQ) scores with a mean of 100 and 
a standard deviation of 15, an IQ score of 110 would have a z score of (110 − 100) / 15 = +0.67. In other words, 
a score of 110 is 0.67 standard deviations (approximately two thirds of a standard deviation) above the mean. 
Describing Single Variables  |  305Similarly, a raw score of 85 would have a z score of (85 − 100) / 15 = −1.00. In other words, a score of 85 is one 
standard deviation below the mean. 
There ar e se veral r easons tha t z scores ar e impor tant. Again, the y pr ovide a w ay o f descri bing wher e 
an individual’ s sc ore is loc ated wi thin a distri bution and ar e some times use d to r eport the r esults o f 
standardized tests. The y also pr ovide one w ay o f defining outliers. F or e xample, outliers ar e some times 
defined as scores that have z scores less than −3.00 or greater than +3.00. In other words, they are defined 
as scores that are more than thr ee standard deviations from the me an. Finally, z scores play an impor tant 
role in understanding and computing other statistics, as we will see shortly. 
 
Online Descriptive Statistics 
Although many researchers use commercially available software such as SPSS and Excel to analyze their data, 
there are several free online analysis tools that can also be extremely useful. Many allow you to enter or upload 
your data and then make one click to conduct several descriptive statistical analyses. Among them are the 
following. 
Rice Virtual Lab in Statistics 
http://onlinestatbook.com/stat_analysis/index.html 
VassarStats 
http://faculty.vassar.edu/lowry/VassarStats.html 
Bright Stat 
http://www.brightstat.com 
For a more complete list, see http://statpages.org/index.html. 
Image Description 
Figure 12.2 long description: A histogram showing a bimodal distribution of scores on the Beck Depression 
Inventory. The horizontal axis is labelled “Beck Depression Inventory Score,” and the vertical axis is labelled 
“Frequency.” The data is as such: 
• BDI: 0–9, Frequency: 3 
• BDI: 10–19, Frequency: 14 
• BDI: 20–29, Frequency: 6 
• BDI: 30–39, Frequency: 2 
• BDI: 40–49, Frequency: 3 
306  |  Describing Single Variables• BDI: 50–59, Frequency: 12 
• BDI: 60–69, Frequency: 4 
The two distinct peaks are the 10–19 range and the 50–59 range. [Return to Figure 12.2] 
Figure 12.4 long description: Two histograms with the same central tendency but different variability. Each 
horizontal axis is labelled “X” and has values from 1 to 20, and each vertical axis is labelled “Frequency” and 
has values from 1 to 20. Each histogram also has a mean, median, mode, and central tendency of 10. 
In the first histogram, variability is relatively low. The data is as such: 
• X: 6, Frequency: 1 
• X: 7, Frequency: 5 
• X: 8, Frequency: 10 
• X: 9, Frequency: 16 
• X: 10, Frequency: 18 
• X: 11, Frequency: 16 
• X: 12, Frequency: 10 
• X: 13, Frequency: 5 
• X: 14, Frequency: 1 
In the second histogram, variability is relatively high. The data is as such: 
• X: 0, Frequency: 1 
• X: 1, Frequency: 1 
• X: 2, Frequency: 2 
• X: 3, Frequency: 2 
• X: 4, Frequency: 3 
• X: 5, Frequency: 3 
• X: 6, Frequency: 5 
• X: 7, Frequency: 6 
• X: 8, Frequency: 7 
• X: 9, Frequency: 7 
• X: 10, Frequency: 8 
• X: 11, Frequency: 7 
• X: 12, Frequency: 7 
• X: 13, Frequency: 6 
• X: 14, Frequency: 5 
• X: 15, Frequency: 3 
• X: 16, Frequency: 3 
• X: 17, Frequency: 2 
• X: 18, Frequency: 2 
• X: 19, Frequency: 1 
• X: 20, Frequency: 1 
Describing Single Variables  |  307[Return to Figure 12.4] 
308  |  Describing Single Variables53.  Describing Statistical Relationships 
Learning Objectives 
1. Describe differences between groups in terms of their means and standard deviations, and in terms of 
Cohen’s d. 
2. Describe correlations between quantitative variables in terms of Pearson’s r. 
 
As w e ha ve se en thr oughout this book, most in teresting r esearch questions in psy chology ar e about 
statistical r elationships be tween v ariables. I n this se ction, w e r evisit the t wo basic f orms o f sta tistical 
relationship in troduced e arlier in the book —differences be tween gr oups or c onditions and r elationships 
between quantitative variables—and we consider how to describe them in more detail. 
Differences Between Groups or Conditions 
Differences between groups or conditions are usually described in terms of the mean and standard deviation 
of each group or condition. For example, Thomas Ollendick and his c olleagues conducted a study in which 
they e valuated t wo one-session tr eatments f or simple phobias in childr en (Ollendick e t al., 2009 )1. The y 
randomly assigned children with an intense fear (e.g., to dogs) to one o f three conditions. In the exposure 
condition, the children actually confronted the object of their fear under the guidance of a trained therapist. 
In the e ducation condition, they learned about phobias and some str ategies for coping with them. I n the 
wait-list control condition, they were waiting to receive a treatment after the study was over. The severity 
of each child’s phobia w as then r ated on a 1 -to-8 scale by a clinician who did not kno w which tr eatment 
the child had received. (This was one of several dependent variables.) The mean fear rating in the education 
condition was 4.83 wi th a standard deviation of 1.52, while the me an fear rating in the e xposure condition 
was 3.47 wi th a standar d deviation of 1.77. The me an fear rating in the c ontrol condition was 5.56 wi th a 
standard de viation o f 1.21. I n other w ords, both tr eatments worked, but the e xposure tr eatment worked 
better than the e ducation treatment. As we have seen, differences between group or condition means can 
be presented in a bar gr aph like that in Figure 12.5, wher e the heig hts of the bars r epresent the gr oup or 
condition means. We will look more closely at creating American Psychological Association (APA)-style bar 
graphs shortly. 
 
Describing Statistical Relationships  |  309Figure 12.5 Bar Graph Showing Mean Clinician Phobia Ratings for Children in Two Treatment Conditions. [Image 
description] 
It is also important to be able to describe the strength of a statistical relationship, which is often referred to 
as the effect size. The most widely used measure of effect size for differences between group or condition 
means is called Cohen’s d, which is the difference between the two means divided by the standard deviation: 
d = (M1 −M2)/SD 
In this formula, it does not really matter which mean is M1 and which is M2. If there is a treatment group and 
a control group, the treatment group mean is usually M1 and the control group mean is M2. Otherwise, the 
larger mean is usually M1 and the smaller mean M2 so that Cohen’s d turns out to be positive. Indeed Cohen’s 
d values should al ways be posi tive so i t is the absolute dif ference between the me ans that is c onsidered 
in the numer ator. The standar d de viation in this f ormula is usuall y a kind o f a verage o f the t wo gr oup 
standard deviations c alled the poole d-within groups standard deviation. To compute the poole d wi thin-
groups standar d de viation, add the sum o f the squar ed dif ferences f or Gr oup 1 to the sum o f squar ed 
differences for Group 2, divide this by the sum of the two sample sizes, and then take the square root of that. 
Informally, however, the standard deviation of either group can be used instead. 
Conceptually, Cohen’s d is the dif ference be tween the t wo me ans e xpressed in standar d de viation uni ts. 
(Notice its similarity to a  z score, which e xpresses the dif ference between an individual sc ore and a me an 
in standard deviation units.) A Cohen ’s d of 0.50 means that the t wo group means differ by 0.50 standard 
deviations (half a standard deviation). A Cohen’s d of 1.20 means that they differ by 1.20 standard deviations. 
But ho w should w e in terpret these v alues in terms o f the str ength o f the r elationship or the siz e o f 
the dif ference between the me ans? Table 12.4 pr esents some guidelines f or interpreting Cohen’s d values 
in psy chological r esearch ( Cohen, 1992) 2. V alues ne ar 0 .20 ar e c onsidered small, v alues ne ar 0 .50 ar e 
considered medium, and v alues near 0.80 are considered large. Thus a Cohen ’s d value of 0.50 represents 
310  |  Describing Statistical Relationshipsa me dium-sized dif ference be tween t wo me ans, and a Cohen ’s d value o f 1.20 r epresents a v ery lar ge 
difference in the c ontext of psychological research. In the research by Ollendick and his c olleagues, there 
was a large difference (d = 0.82) between the exposure and education conditions. 
 
Table 12.4 Guidelines for Referring to 
Cohen’s d and Pearson’s r Values as “Strong,” 
“Medium,” or “Weak” 
Relationship strength Cohen’s d Pearson’s r 
Strong/large 0.80 ± 0.50 
Medium 0.50 ± 0.30 
Weak/small 0.20 ± 0.10 
 
Cohen’s d is useful be cause i t has the same me aning r egardless o f the v ariable being c ompared or the 
scale i t w as me asured on. A Cohen ’s d of 0 .20 me ans tha t the t wo gr oup me ans dif fer b y 0 .20 standar d 
deviations whether we are talking about scores on the Rosenberg Self-Esteem scale, reaction time measured 
in milliseconds, number of siblings, or diastolic blood pressure measured in millimeters of mercury. Not only 
does this make it easier for researchers to communicate with each other about their results, it also makes it 
possible to combine and compare results across different studies using different measures. 
Be a ware tha t the term  effect size  can be misle ading be cause i t sugg ests a c ausal r elationship—that the 
difference between the two means is an “effect” of being in one gr oup or condition as opposed to another. 
Imagine, f or e xample, a stud y showing that a gr oup o f e xercisers is happier on a verage than a gr oup o f 
nonexercisers, with an “effect size” of d = 0.35. If the study was an experiment—with participants randomly 
assigned to e xercise and no-e xercise conditions—then one c ould conclude that exercising caused a small 
to medium-sized increase in happiness. If the study was cross-sectional, however, then one could conclude 
only that the exercisers were happier than the nonexercisers by a small to medium-sized amount. In other 
words, simply calling the difference an “effect size” does not make the relationship a causal one. 
 
Sex Differences Expressed as Cohen’s d 
Researcher Janet Shibley Hyde has looked at the results of numerous studies on psychological sex differences 
and expressed the results in terms of Cohen’s d (Hyde, 2007)3. Following are a few of the values she has found, 
averaging across several studies in each case. (Note that because she always treats the mean for men as M1 and 
the mean for women as M2, positive values indicate that men score higher and negative values indicate that 
women score higher.) 
Describing Statistical Relationships  |  311 
Mathematical problem solving +0.08 
Reading comprehension −0.09 
Smiling −0.40 
Aggression +0.50 
Attitudes toward casual sex +0.81 
Leadership effectiveness −0.02 
 
Hyde points out that although men and women differ by a large amount on some variables (e.g., attitudes 
toward casual sex), they differ by only a small amount on the vast majority. In many cases, Cohen’s d is less than 
0.10, which she terms a “trivial” difference. (The difference in talkativeness discussed in Chapter 1 was also 
trivial: d = 0.06.) Although researchers and non-researchers alike often emphasize sex differences, Hyde has 
argued that it makes at least as much sense to think of men and women as fundamentally similar. She refers to 
this as the “gender similarities hypothesis.” 
Correlations Between Quantitative Variables 
As we have seen throughout the book, many interesting statistical relationships take the form of correlations 
between quantitative variables. For example, researchers Kurt Carlson and Jacqueline Conard conducted a 
study on the r elationship between the alphabe tical position of the first le tter of people’s last names ( from 
A = 1 to Z = 26 ) and how quickly those people responded to consumer appeals (Carlson & Conard, 2011)4. In 
one study, they sent emails to a large group of MBA students, offering free basketball tickets from a limited 
supply. The result was that the further toward the end of the alphabet students’ last names were, the faster 
they tended to respond. These results are summarized in Figure 12.6. 
 
312  |  Describing Statistical RelationshipsFigure 12.6 Line Graph Showing the Relationship Between the Alphabetical Position of People’s Last Names and How Quickly 
Those People Respond to Offers of Consumer Goods. [Image description] 
Such r elationships ar e o ften pr esented using line gr aphs or sc atterplots, which sho w ho w the le vel o f 
one v ariable dif fers acr oss the r ange o f the other . I n the line gr aph in  Figure 12. 6, f or e xample, e ach 
point represents the me an response time f or participants with last names in the first, se cond, third, and 
fourth quartiles (or quarters) of the name distribution. It clearly shows how response time tends to decline 
as pe ople’s last names g et closer to the end o f the alphabe t. The sc atterplot in  Figure 12. 7, sho ws the 
relationship between 25 r esearch methods students’ scores on the R osenberg Self-Esteem Scale given on 
two occasions a week apart. Here the points represent individuals, and we can see that the higher students 
scored on the first occasion, the higher they tended to score on the second occasion. In general, line graphs 
are used when the variable on the x-axis has (or is organized into) a small number of distinct values, such as 
the four quartiles of the name distribution. Scatterplots are used when the variable on the x-axis has a large 
number of values, such as the different possible self-esteem scores. 
 
Describing Statistical Relationships  |  313Figure 12.7 Statistical Relationship Between Several University Students’ Scores on the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale Given 
on Two Occasions a Week Apart. [Image description] 
The data presented in Figure 12.7 provide a good example of a positive relationship, in which hig her scores 
on one variable tend to be associated with higher scores on the other (so that the points go from the lower 
left to the upper right of the graph). The data presented in Figure 12.6 provide a good example of a negative 
relationship, in which higher scores on one variable tend to be associated with lower scores on the other (so 
that the points go from the upper left to the lower right). 
Both of these examples are also linear relationships, in which the points are reasonably well fit by a single 
straight line. Nonlinear relationships are those in which the poin ts are better fit by a cur ved line. Figure 
12.8, for example, shows a hypothetical relationship between the amount of sleep people get per night and 
their level of depression. In this example, the line that best fits the points is a curve—a kind of upside down 
“U”—because people who get about eight hours of sleep tend to be the least depressed, while those who get 
too little sleep and those who g et too much sle ep tend to be mor e depressed. Nonlinear relationships are 
not uncommon in psychology, but a detailed discussion of them is beyond the scope of this book. 
 
314  |  Describing Statistical RelationshipsFigure 12.8 A Hypothetical Nonlinear Relationship Between How Much Sleep People Get per Night and How Depressed They 
Are. [Image description] 
As w e sa w e arlier in the book, the str ength o f a c orrelation be tween quan titative v ariables is t ypically 
measured using a sta tistic c alled P earson’s r. As  Figure 12.9 sho ws, i ts possi ble v alues r ange fr om − 1.00, 
through zero, to + 1.00. A v alue of 0 me ans there is no r elationship between the t wo variables. In addition 
to his guidelines f or in terpreting Cohen ’s d, Cohen o ffered guidelines f or in terpreting P earson’s r in 
psychological r esearch ( see Table 12.4 ). V alues ne ar ±.10 ar e c onsidered small, v alues ne ar ± .30 ar e 
considered me dium, and v alues ne ar ±.50 ar e c onsidered lar ge. N otice tha t the sign o f P earson’s r is 
unrelated to i ts str ength. P earson’s r values o f +.30 and −.30 , f or e xample, ar e e qually str ong; i t is just 
that one represents a moderate positive relationship and the other a moder ate negative relationship. Like 
Cohen’s d, Pearson’s r is also referred to as a me asure of “effect size” even though the relationship may not 
be a causal one. 
 
Describing Statistical Relationships  |  315Figure 12.9 Pearson’s r Ranges From −1.00 (Representing the Strongest Possible Negative Relationship), Through 0 
(Representing No Relationship), to +1.00 (Representing the Strongest Possible Positive Relationship). [Image description] 
The computations for Pearson’s r are more complicated than those f or Cohen’s d. Although you may never 
have to do them b y hand, it is still instruc tive to see how. Computationally, Pearson’s r is the “mean cross-
product of z scores.” To compute it, one starts by transforming all the scores to z scores. For the X variable, 
subtract the me an o f X from e ach sc ore and divide e ach dif ference b y the standar d de viation o f X. F or 
the Y variable, subtract the mean of Y from each score and divide each difference by the standard deviation 
of Y. Then, for each individual, multiply the two z scores together to form a cross-product. Finally, take the 
mean of the cross-products. The formula looks like this: 
 
Table 12.5 illustr ates these c omputations for a small se t of data. The first c olumn lists the sc ores for the
X variable, which has a me an of 4.00 and a standar d deviation of 1.90. The se cond column is the  z-score 
for each of these raw scores. The third and fourth columns list the raw scores for the Y variable, which has 
a mean of 40 and a standar d deviation of 11.78, and the c orresponding z scores. The fif th column lists the 
cross-products. For example, the first one is 0 .00 multiplied by −0.85, which is e qual to 0 .00. The se cond 
is 1.58 multiplied by 1.19, which is equal to 1.88. The me an of these cross-products, shown at the bottom of 
that column, is Pearson’s r, which in this case is +.53. There are other formulas for computing Pearson’s r by 
hand that may be quicker. This approach, however, is much clearer in terms of communicating conceptually 
what Pearson’s r is. 
 
316  |  Describing Statistical RelationshipsTable 12.5 Sample Computations for Pearson’s r 
X zx Y zy zxzy 
4 0.00 30 −0.85 0.00 
7 1.58 54 1.19 1.88 
2 −1.05 23 −1.44 1.52 
5 0.53 43 0.26 0.13 
2 −1.05 50 0.85 −0.89 
Mx = 4.00 My = 40.00 r = 0.53 
SDx = 1.90 SDy = 11.78 
 
As we saw earlier, there are t wo common si tuations in which the v alue of Pearson’s r can be misle ading. 
One is when the r elationship under stud y is nonline ar. E ven thoug h F igure 12.8 sho ws a fair ly str ong 
relationship between depression and sle ep, Pearson’s r would be close to z ero because the poin ts in the 
scatterplot are not w ell fit by a sing le straight line. This me ans that it is impor tant to mak e a sc atterplot 
and confirm that a relationship is approximately linear before using Pearson’s r. The other is when one or 
both of the variables have a limited range in the sample relative to the population. This problem is referred 
to as restriction of range. Assume, for example, that there is a strong negative correlation between people’s 
age and their enjoyment of hip hop music as shown by the scatterplot in Figure 12.10. Pearson’s r here is −.77. 
However, if we were to collect data only from 18- to 24-year-olds—represented by the shaded area of Figure 
12.11—then the relationship would seem to be quite weak. In fact, Pearson’s r for this restricted range of ages 
is 0. It is a g ood idea, therefore, to design studies to a void restriction of range. For example, if ag e is one 
of your primary variables, then y ou can plan to c ollect data from people of a wide r ange of ages. Because 
restriction of range is not al ways anticipated or e asily avoidable, however, it is g ood practice to e xamine 
your data for possible restriction of range and to interpret Pearson’s r in light of it. (There are also statistical 
methods to correct Pearson’s r for restriction of range, but they are beyond the scope of this book). 
 
Describing Statistical Relationships  |  317Figure 12.10 Hypothetical Data Showing How a Strong Overall Correlation Can Appear to Be Weak When One Variable Has 
a Restricted Range. The overall correlation here is −.77, but the correlation for the 18- to 24-year-olds (in the blue box) is 0. 
[Image description] 
 
Image Descriptions 
Figure 12.5 long description:  Bar graph. The horiz ontal axis is labelle d “Condition,” and the v ertical axis is 
labelled “Clinician Rating of Severity.” The data is as follows: 
• Condition: Education. Clinician Rating of Severity: 4.83 
• Condition: Exposure. Clinician Rating of Severity: 3.47 
• Condition: Control. Clinician Rating of Severity: 5.56 
[Return to Figure 12.5] 
Figure 12.6 long description:  Line gr aph. The horiz ontal axis is labelle d “L ast N ame Quar tile,” and the 
vertical axis is labelled “Response Times (z Scores)” and ranges from −0.4 to 0.4. The data is as such: 
• Last Name Quartile: First. Response Time: 0.2 
• Last Name Quartile: Second. Response Time: 0.1 
• Last Name Quartile: Third. Response Time: −0.1 
• Last Name Quartile: Fourth. Response Time: −0.2 
318  |  Describing Statistical Relationships[Return to Figure 12.6] 
Figure 12. 7 long description:  Scatterplot sho wing studen ts’ sc ores on the R osenberg Self -Esteem Sc ale 
when scored twice in one w eek. The horizontal axis of the scatterplot is labelled “Time 1,” and the v ertical 
axis is labelled “Time 2.” Each dot represents the two scores of a student. For example, one dot is at 25, 20, 
meaning that the student scored 25 the first time and 20 the se cond time. The dots range from about 12, 11 
to 28, 23. [Return to Figure 12.7] 
Figure 12.8 long description:  Scatterplot sho wing the h ypothetical r elationship be tween the number o f 
hours o f sle ep pe ople g et per nig ht and their le vel o f depr ession. The horiz ontal axis is labelle d “Hours 
of Sleep Per Night” and has v alues ranging from 0 to 14, and the v ertical axis is labelle d “Depression” and 
has values ranging from 0 to 12. A U -shaped dotted line tr aces the appr oximate shape o f the da ta points. 
Two people who get 4 hours of sleep per night scored 9 and 10 on the depr ession scale, which is what two 
people who get 12 hours of sleep also scored. The people who get 4 and 12 hours sc ored the highest on the 
depression scale, and these da ta points form the extreme ends of the U. Three people who get 8 hours o f 
sleep scored 5, 6, and 7 on the depr ession scale. The data points for people who get 8 hours of sleep fall in 
the middle of the U. [Return to Figure 12.8] 
Figure 12.9 long description: Five scatterplots representing the different values of Pearson’s r. 
The first sc atterplot represents Pearson’s r with a v alue of −1.00. The sc atterplot shows a diag onal line o f 
points that extends from the top left corner to the bottom right corner. The higher the value of the variable 
on the x -axis, the lo wer the v alue o f the v ariable on the y-axis. This is the str ongest possi ble nega tive 
relationship. 
The second scatterplot represents Pearson’s r with a value of −0.50. It depicts a slightly negative relationship 
between the v ariables on the x - and y-ax es. Points are plotted loosely around an invisible line g oing from 
the top left corner to the bottom right corner. 
The thir d sc atterplot r epresents P earson’s r with a v alue o f 0 . P oints appe ar r andomly; ther e is no 
relationship between the x- and y-axes. 
The fourth scatterplot represents Pearson’s r with a value of +0.50. It depicts a slightly positive relationship 
between the variables on the x- and y-axes. The points are loosely plotted around an invisible line from the 
bottom left to the top right corner. 
The fifth scatterplot represents Pearson’s r with a v alue of +1.00. The sc atterplot shows a diag onal line o f 
points from the bottom left corner to the top right corner. The higher the value of the variable on the x-axis, 
the higher the value of the variable on the y-axis. This is the strongest possible positive relationship. [Return 
to Figure 12.9] 
Figure 12.10 long description: Scatterplot with a horizontal axis labelled “Age” with values from 0 to 100 and 
a vertical axis labelle d “Enjoyment of Hip-Hop” with values from 0 to 10 . Pearson’s r in this sc atterplot is 
−0.77. There is a strong negative relationship between age and enjoyment of hip-hop, as evidenced by these 
ordered pairs: (20, 8), (40, 6), (69, 4), (80, 3). But if you restrict age to examine only the 18- to 2 4-year-olds, 
this relationship is much less clear. Each of the seven subjects in this range rate their enjoyment of hip-hop 
Describing Statistical Relationships  |  319as either 6, 7, or 8. The youngest subject rates a 6, whereas the oldest rates a 7, and some subjects in between 
rate an 8. Since there is no clear pattern, the correlation for 18- to 24-year-olds is 0. [Return to Figure 12.10] 
Notes 
1. Ollendick, T. H., Öst, L.-G., Reuterskiöld, L., Costa, N., Cederlund, R., Sirbu, C.,…Jarrett, M. A. (2009). One-session 
treatments of specific phobias in youth: A randomized clinical trial in the United States and Sweden. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77, 504–516. 
2. Cohen, J. (1992). A power primer. Psychological Bulletin, 112, 155–159. 
3. Hyde, J. S. (2007). New directions in the study of gender similarities and differences. Current Directions in 
Psychological Science, 16, 259–263. 
4. Carlson, K. A., & Conard, J. M. (2011). The last name effect: How last name influences acquisition timing. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 38(2), 300-307. doi: 10.1086/658470 
320  |  Describing Statistical Relationships54.  Expressing Your Results 
Learning Objectives 
1. Write out simple descriptive statistics in American Psychological Association (APA) style. 
2. Interpret and create simple APA-style figures—including bar graphs, line graphs, and scatterplots. 
3. Interpret and create simple APA-style tables—including tables of group or condition means and 
correlation matrices. 
 
Once you have conducted your descriptive statistical analyses, you will ne ed to pr esent them to others. 
In this se ction, w e f ocus on pr esenting descriptiv e sta tistical r esults in wri ting, in figur es, and in 
tables—following American Psychological Association (APA) guidelines f or written research reports. These 
principles can be adapted easily to other presentation formats such as posters and slide show presentations. 
Presenting Descriptive Statistics in Writing 
Recall that APA style includes several rules for presenting numerical results in the text (see 4.31–4.34 in the 
APA Publication Manual) . These include using w ords only for numbers less than 10 tha t do not r epresent 
precise statistical results and using numer als for numbers 10 and hig her. However, statistical results are 
always presented in the form of numerals rather than words and are usually rounded to two decimal places 
(e.g., “2.00” rather than “two” or “2”). They can be presented either in the narrative description of the results 
or parenthetically—much like reference citations. When you have a small number o f results to report, it is 
often most efficient to write them out. Here are some examples: 
The mean age of the participants was 22.43 years with a standard deviation of 2.34. 
Among the par ticipants with low self-esteem, those in a nega tive mood e xpressed stronger intentions to 
have unprotected sex (M = 4.05, SD = 2.32) than those in a positive mood (M = 2.15, SD = 2.27). 
The treatment group had a me an of 23.40 (SD = 9.33), while the c ontrol group had a me an of 20.87 (SD = 
8.45). 
The test-retest correlation was .96. 
There was a moder ate negative correlation between the alphabe tical position of respondents’ last names 
and their response time (r = −.27). 
Expressing Your Results  |  321Notice that when pr esented in the narr ative, the terms  mean and standard deviation are wri tten out, but 
when pr esented par enthetically, the symbols  M and SD are use d inste ad. N otice also tha t i t is espe cially 
important to use par allel construction to e xpress similar or c omparable results in similar w ays. The thir d 
example is much better than the following nonparallel alternative: 
The treatment group had a mean of 23.40 (SD = 9.33), while 20.87 was the mean of the control group, which 
had a standard deviation of 8.45. 
Presenting Descriptive Statistics in Figures 
When y ou ha ve a lar ge number o f r esults to r eport, y ou c an o ften do i t mor e cle arly and ef ficiently 
with a gr aphical depic tion o f the da ta, such as pie char ts, bar gr aphs, or sc atterplots. I n an AP A st yle 
research report, these graphs are presented as figures. When you prepare figures for an APA-style research 
report, there are some general guidelines that you should keep in mind. First, the figure should always add 
important information rather than repeat information that already appears in the text or in a table (if a figure 
presents information more clearly or efficiently, then you should keep the figure and eliminate the text or 
table.) Second, figures should be as simple as possible. For example, the Publication Manual discourages the 
use of color unless it is absolutely necessary (although color can still be an effective element in posters, slide 
show presentations, or textbooks.) Third, figures should be in terpretable on their o wn. A reader should be 
able to understand the basic result based only on the figure and its caption and should not have to refer to 
the text for an explanation. 
There are also several more technical guidelines for presentation of figures that include the f ollowing (see 
the APA Publication Manual section 5.20 through 5.30): 
• Layout of graphs 
◦ In general, scatterplots, bar graphs, and line graphs should be slightly wider than they are tall. 
◦ The independent variable should be plotted on the x-axis and the dependent variable on 
the y-axis. 
◦ Values should increase from left to right on the x-axis and from bottom to top on the y-axis. 
◦ The x-axis and y-axis should begin with the value zero. 
• Axis Labels and Legends 
◦ Axis labels should be clear and concise and include the units of measurement if they do not appear 
in the caption. 
◦ Axis labels should be parallel to the axis. 
◦ Legends should appear within the figure. 
◦ Text should be in the same simple font throughout and no smaller than 8 point and no larger than 
14 point. 
• Captions 
◦ Captions are titled with the word “Figure”, followed by the figure number in the order in which it 
appears in the text, and terminated with a period. This title is italicized. 
322  |  Expressing Your Results◦ After the title is a brief description of the figure terminated with a period (e.g., “Reaction times of 
the control versus experimental group.”) 
◦ Following the description, include any information needed to interpret the figure, such as any 
abbreviations, units of measurement (if not in the axis label), units of error bars, etc. 
 
“Convincing” retrieved from http://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/convincing.png (CC-BY-NC 2.5) [Image description] 
Bar Graphs 
As we have seen throughout this book,  bar graphs are generally used to pr esent and c ompare the me an 
scores for two or more groups or conditions. The bar graph in Figure 12.11 is an APA-style version of Figure 
12.4. Notice that it conforms to all the guidelines liste d. A new element in Figure 12.11 is the smaller v ertical 
bars tha t e xtend both up ward and do wnward fr om the top o f e ach main bar . These ar e error bars, and 
they represent the v ariability in e ach group or c ondition. Althoug h they sometimes extend one standar d 
deviation in each direction, they are more likely to extend one standard error in each direction (as in Figure 
12.11). The standard error is the standar d deviation of the gr oup divided by the squar e root of the sample 
size of the gr oup. The standar d error is use d because, in g eneral, a dif ference between group means that 
is greater than t wo standard errors is sta tistically significant. Thus one c an “see” whether a dif ference is 
statistically significant based on a bar graph with error bars. 
 
Expressing Your Results  |  323Figure 12.11 Sample APA-Style Bar Graph, With Error Bars Representing the Standard Errors, Based on Research by 
Ollendick and Colleagues. [Image description] 
Line Graphs 
Line graphs are used when the independent variable is measured in a more continuous manner (e.g., time) 
or to present correlations between quantitative variables when the independent variable has, or is organized 
into, a r elatively small number o f distinct levels. Each poin t in a line gr aph represents the me an score on 
the dependent variable for participants at one level of the independent variable. Figure 12.12 is an APA-style 
version of the r esults of Carlson and Conar d. Notice that it includes err or bars r epresenting the standar d 
error and conforms to all the stated guidelines. 
 
324  |  Expressing Your ResultsFigure 12.12 Sample APA-Style Line Graph Based on Research by Carlson and Conard. [Image description] 
In most c ases, the inf ormation in a line gr aph could just as e asily be pr esented in a bar gr aph. In Figure 
12.12, f or e xample, one c ould r eplace e ach poin t wi th a bar tha t r eaches up to the same le vel and le ave 
the err or bars rig ht wher e the y ar e. This emphasiz es the fundamen tal similari ty o f the t wo t ypes o f 
statistical relationship. Both ar e differences in the a verage score on one v ariable across levels of another. 
The convention followed by most researchers, however, is to use a bar gr aph when the variable plotted on 
the x-axis is categorical and a line graph when it is quantitative. 
Scatterplots 
Scatterplots are use d to pr esent c orrelations and r elationships be tween quan titative variables when the 
variable on the  x-axis ( typically the independen t v ariable) has a lar ge number o f le vels. Each poin t in a 
scatterplot represents an individual rather than the mean for a group of individuals, and there are no lines 
connecting the points. The graph in Figure 12.13 is an APA-style version of Figure 12.7, which illustrates a few 
additional points. First, when the variables on the x-axis and y-axis are conceptually similar and me asured 
on the same scale—as here, where they are measures of the same variable on two different occasions—this 
can be emphasiz ed b y making the ax es the same length. Se cond, when t wo or mor e individuals fall a t 
exactly the same point on the graph, one way this can be indicated is by offsetting the points slightly along 
the x-axis. Other w ays are by displaying the number o f individuals in par entheses next to the poin t or b y 
Expressing Your Results  |  325making the point larger or darker in proportion to the number o f individuals. Finally, the straight line that 
best fits the points in the scatterplot, which is called the regression line, can also be included. 
 
Figure 12.13 Sample APA-Style Scatterplot. [Image description] 
Expressing Descriptive Statistics in Tables 
326  |  Expressing Your ResultsLike graphs, tables c an be use d to pr esent large amounts of information clearly and ef ficiently. The same 
general principles appl y to tables as appl y to gr aphs. The y should add impor tant inf ormation to the 
presentation of your results, be as simple as possi ble, and be in terpretable on their o wn. Again, w e focus 
here on tables for an APA-style manuscript. 
The most common use of tables is to pr esent several means and standard deviations—usually for complex 
research designs wi th multiple independen t and dependen t v ariables. Figure 12.14, f or e xample, sho ws 
the r esults o f a h ypothetical stud y similar to the one b y Mac Donald and Mar tineau (200 2)1 (The me ans 
in Figure 12.14 ar e the me ans r eported b y Mac Donald and Mar tineau, but the standar d err ors ar e not ). 
Recall that these r esearchers categorized participants as ha ving low or hig h self-esteem, put them in to a 
negative or posi tive mood, and me asured their in tentions to ha ve unpr otected se x. The y also me asured 
participants’ attitudes toward unprotected sex. Notice that the table includes horizontal lines spanning the 
entire table at the top and bottom, and just beneath the column headings. Furthermore, every column has a 
heading—including the leftmost column—and there are additional headings that span two or more columns 
that help to organize the information and present it more efficiently. Finally, notice that APA-style tables are 
numbered consecutively starting at 1 (Table 1, Table 2, and so on) and given a brief but clear and descriptive 
title. 
 
Figure 12.14 Sample APA-Style Table Presenting Means and Standard Deviations. [Image description] 
Another common use of tables is to pr esent correlations—usually measured by Pearson’s r—among several 
variables. This kind o f table is c alled a correlation matrix. Figure 12.15 is a c orrelation matrix based on a 
study by David McCabe and colleagues (McCabe, Roediger, McDaniel, Balota, & Hambrick, 2010)2. They were 
interested in the r elationships between working memory and several other variables. We can see from the 
Expressing Your Results  |  327table that the correlation between working memory and executive function, for example, was an extremely 
strong .96, tha t the c orrelation between working memory and v ocabulary was a me dium .27, and tha t all 
the measures except vocabulary tend to de cline with age. Notice here that only half the table is fille d in 
because the other half w ould have identical values. For example, the P earson’s r value in the upper rig ht 
corner (working memory and age) would be the same as the one in the lo wer left corner (age and working 
memory). The correlation of a variable with itself is always 1.00, so these v alues are replaced by dashes to 
make the table easier to read. 
 
Figure 12.15 Sample APA-Style Table (Correlation Matrix) Based on Research by McCabe and Colleagues. [Image description] 
As wi th gr aphs, pr ecise sta tistical r esults tha t appe ar in a table do not ne ed to be r epeated in the te xt. 
Instead, the writer can note major trends and alert the reader to details (e.g., specific correlations) that are 
of particular interest. 
Image Description 
“Convincing” long description: A four-panel comic strip. In the first panel, a man says to a woman, “I think 
we should give it another shot.” The woman says, “We should break up, and I can prove it.” 
In the second panel, there is a line graph with a downward trend titled “Our Relationship.” 
In the third panel, the man, bent over and looking at the graph in the woman’s hands, says, “Huh.” 
In the fourth panel, the man says, “Maybe you’re right.” The woman says, “I knew data would convince you.” 
The man r eplies, “N o, I just think I c an do be tter than some one who doesn ’t label her ax es.” [Return to 
“Convincing”] 
328  |  Expressing Your ResultsFigure 12.11 long description: A sample APA-style bar graph, with a horizontal axis labelled “Condition” and a 
vertical axis labelled “Clinician Rating of Severity.” The caption of the graph says, “Figure X. Mean clinician’s 
rating of phobia se verity for participants receiving the e ducation treatment and the e xposure treatment. 
Error bars represent standard errors.” At the top of each data bar is an error bar, which look likes a capital I: 
a vertical line with short horizontal lines attached to its top and bottom. The bottom half of each error bar 
hangs over the top o f the data bar, while each top half sticks out the top o f the data bar. [Return to Figure 
12.11] 
Figure 12.12 long description:  A sample AP A-style line gr aph wi th a horiz ontal axis labelle d “L ast N ame 
Quartile” and a v ertical axis labelled “Response Times (z Scores).” The caption of the graph says, “Figure X. 
Mean response time by the alphabetical position of respondents’ names in the alphabet. Response times are 
expressed as z scores. Error bars represent standard errors.” Each data point has an error bar sticking out of 
its top and bottom. [Return to Figure 12.12] 
Figure 12.13 long description:  Sample APA-style scatterplot with a horiz ontal axis labelle d “Time 1” and a 
vertical axis labelled “Time 2.” Each axis has values from 10 to 30. The caption of the scatterplot says, “Figure 
X. Relationship between scores on the Rosenberg self-esteem scale taken by 25 research methods students 
on two occasions one week apart. Pearson’s r = .96.” Most of the data points are clustered around the dashed 
regression line that extends from approximately (12, 11) to (29, 22). [Return to Figure 12.13] 
Figure 12.14 long description: Sample APA-style table presenting means and standard deviations. The table 
is titled “Table X” and is captioned, “Means and Standard Deviations of Intentions to Have Unprotected Sex 
and Attitudes Toward Unprotected Sex as a Function of Both Mood and Self-Esteem.” The data is organized 
into negative and positive mood and details intentions and attitudes toward unprotected sex. 
Negative mood: 
• Intentions 
◦ High—Mean, 2.46 
◦ High—Standard Deviation, 1.97 
◦ Low—Mean, 4.05 
◦ Low—Standard Deviation, 2.32 
• Attitudes 
◦ High—Mean, 1.65 
◦ High—Standard Deviation, 2.23 
◦ Low—Mean, 1.95 
◦ Low—Standard Deviation, 2.01 
Positive mood: 
• Intentions 
◦ High—Mean, 2.45 
◦ High—Standard Deviation, 2.00 
◦ Low—Mean, 2.15 
Expressing Your Results  |  329◦ Low—Standard Deviation, 2.27 
• Attitudes 
◦ High—Mean, 1.82 
◦ High—Standard Deviation, 2.32 
◦ Low—Mean, 1.23 
◦ Low—Standard Deviation, 1.75 
[Return to Figure 12.14] 
Figure 12.15 long description:  Sample APA-style correlation matrix, titled “ Table X: Corr elations Between 
Five Cognitive Variables and Age.” The five cognitive variables are: 
1. Working memory 
2. Executive function 
3. Processing speed 
4. Vocabulary 
5. Episodic memory 
The data is as such: 
Table X: Correlations Between Five Cognitive 
Variables and Age 
Measure 1 2 3 4 5 
1. Working memory — 
2. Executive function .96 — 
3. Processing speed .78 .78 — 
4. Vocabulary .27 .45 .08 — 
5. Episodic memory .73 .75 .52 .38 — 
6. Age −.59 −.56 −.82 .22 −.41 
[Return to Figure 12.15] 
330  |  Expressing Your ResultsMedia attributions 
• Convincing by XKCD CC BY-NC (Attribution NonCommercial) 
Notes 
1. MacDonald, T. K., & Martineau, A. M. (2002). Self-esteem, mood, and intentions to use condoms: When does low self-
esteem lead to risky health behaviors? Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 299–306. 
2. McCabe, D. P., Roediger, H. L., McDaniel, M. A., Balota, D. A., & Hambrick, D. Z. (2010). The relationship between 
working memory capacity and executive functioning. Neuropsychology, 24(2), 222–243. doi:10.1037/a0017619 
Expressing Your Results  |  33155.  Conducting Your Analyses 
Learning Objective 
1. Describe the steps involved in preparing and analyzing a typical set of raw data. 
2. Differentiate between planned and exploratory data analyses. 
 
Even when you understand the sta tistics involved, analyzing data can be a c omplicated process. It is likely 
that for each of several participants, there are data for several different variables: demographics such as sex 
and age, one or more independent variables, one or more dependent variables, and perhaps a manipulation 
check. Furthermore, the “raw” (unanalyzed) data might take several different forms—completed paper-and-
pencil questionnaires, computer files filled with numbers or te xt, videos, or wri tten notes—and these ma y 
have to be or ganized, c oded, or c ombined in some w ay. There mig ht e ven be missing, inc orrect, or just 
“suspicious” responses that must be de alt with. In this section, we consider some practical advice to make 
this process as organized and efficient as possible. 
Prepare Your Data for Analysis 
Whether your raw data are on paper or in a c omputer file (or both), there are a f ew things y ou should do 
before you beg in anal yzing them. F irst, be sur e the y do not include an y inf ormation tha t mig ht identify 
individual par ticipants and be sur e tha t y ou ha ve a se cure loc ation wher e y ou c an stor e the da ta and a 
separate se cure loc ation wher e y ou c an stor e an y c onsent f orms. Unless the da ta ar e hig hly sensi tive, 
a lock ed r oom or passw ord-protected c omputer is usuall y g ood enoug h. I t is also a g ood ide a to mak e 
photocopies or backup files o f your data and stor e them in y et another se cure location—at least until the 
project is c omplete. Professional researchers usually keep a c opy of their r aw data and c onsent forms for 
several years in case questions about the procedure, the data, or participant consent arise after the project 
is completed. 
Next, y ou should che ck y our raw data to mak e sur e tha t the y ar e c omplete and appe ar to ha ve be en 
accurately recorded (whether it was participants, yourself, or a computer program that did the recording). 
At this poin t, you mig ht find tha t there are illeg ible or missing r esponses, or ob vious misunderstandings 
(e.g., a response of “12” on a 1-to-10 rating scale). You will have to decide whether such problems are severe 
enough to mak e a par ticipant’s data unusable. I f inf ormation about the main independen t or dependen t 
variable is missing, or if se veral r esponses ar e missing or suspicious, y ou ma y ha ve to e xclude tha t 
participant’s data from the analyses. If you do decide to exclude any data, do not throw them away or delete 
332  |  Conducting Your Analysesthem because you or another r esearcher might want to se e them la ter. Instead, set them aside and k eep 
notes about why you decided to exclude them because you will need to report this information. 
Now you are ready to en ter your data in a spr eadsheet program or, if i t is alr eady in a c omputer file, to 
format it for analysis. You can use a general spreadsheet program like Microsoft Excel or a statistical analysis 
program like SPSS to cr eate your data file. (Data files cr eated in one pr ogram can usually be c onverted to 
work with other pr ograms.) The most c ommon format is f or each row to r epresent a par ticipant and f or 
each column to represent a variable (with the variable name at the top o f each column). A sample da ta file 
is shown in T able 12.6. The first c olumn c ontains par ticipant iden tification numbers. This is f ollowed b y 
columns containing demographic information (sex and age), independent variables (mood, four self-esteem 
items, and the total of the four self-esteem items), and finally dependent variables (intentions and attitudes). 
Categorical variables can usually be entered as category labels (e.g., “M” and “F” f or male and f emale) or as 
numbers (e.g., “0” for negative mood and “1” f or positive mood). Although category labels are often clearer, 
some analyses might require numbers. SPSS allows you to enter numbers but also attach a category label to 
each number. 
 
Table 12.6 Sample Data File 
ID SEX AGE MOOD SE1 SE2 SE3 SE4 TOTAL INT ATT 
1 M 20 1 2 3 2 3 10 6 5 
2 F 22 1 1 0 2 1 4 4 4 
3 F 19 0 2 2 2 2 8 2 3 
4 F 24 0 3 3 2 3 11 5 6 
 
If you have multiple-response measures—such as the self-esteem measure in Table 12.6—you could combine 
the items by hand and then en ter the total sc ore in your spreadsheet. However, it is much be tter to enter 
each response as a separate variable in the spreadsheet—as with the self-esteem measure in Table 12.6—and 
use the software to combine them (e.g., using the “AVERAGE” function in Excel or the “ Compute” function 
in SPSS). Not only is this appr oach more accurate, but it allows you to detect and correct errors, to assess 
internal consistency, and to analyze individual responses if you decide to do so later. 
Preliminary Analyses 
Before turning to your primary research questions, there are often several preliminary analyses to conduct. 
For multiple-r esponse me asures, y ou should assess the in ternal c onsistency o f the me asure. S tatistical 
programs like SPSS will allow you to compute Cronbach’s α or Cohen’s κ. If this is beyond your comfort level, 
you can still compute and evaluate a split-half correlation. 
Next, you should anal yze each important variable separately. (This step is not ne cessary for manipulated 
independent variables, of course, because you as the r esearcher determined what the distri bution would 
be.) Mak e histogr ams f or e ach one, note their shapes, and c ompute the c ommon me asures o f c entral 
Conducting Your Analyses  |  333tendency and variability. Be sure you understand what these statistics mean in terms of the variables you are 
interested in. For example, a distribution of self-report happiness ratings on a 1-to-10-point scale might be 
unimodal and negatively skewed with a mean of 8.25 and a standard deviation of 1.14. But what this means is 
that most par ticipants r ated themsel ves fair ly hig h on the happiness sc ale, wi th a small number r ating 
themselves noticeably lower. 
Now is the time to iden tify outliers, e xamine them mor e closel y, and de cide wha t to do about them. 
You mig ht disc over tha t wha t a t first appe ars to be an outlier is the r esult o f a r esponse being en tered 
incorrectly in the data file, in which c ase you only need to correct the data file and move on. Alternatively, 
you might suspect that an outlier r epresents some other kind o f error, misunderstanding, or lack o f effort 
by a par ticipant. For example, in a r eaction time distri bution in which most par ticipants took onl y a f ew 
seconds to respond, a participant who took 3 minutes to respond would be an outlier. It seems likely that this 
participant did not understand the task (or at least was not paying very close attention). Also, including their 
reaction time would have a large impact on the me an and standard deviation for the sample. I n situations 
like this, it can be justifiable to exclude the outlying response or participant from the analyses. If you do this, 
however, you should keep notes on which responses or participants you have excluded and why, and apply 
those same cri teria consistently to e very response and e very participant. When you present your results, 
you should indic ate how many responses or par ticipants you excluded and the spe cific cri teria that you 
used. And again, do not li terally throw away or dele te the da ta that you choose to e xclude. Just se t them 
aside because you or another researcher might want to see them later. 
Keep in mind tha t outliers do not  necessarily represent an error, misunderstanding, or lack o f effort. They 
might r epresent trul y e xtreme r esponses or par ticipants. F or e xample, in one lar ge univ ersity studen t 
sample, the vast majority of participants reported having had fewer than 15 sexual partners, but there were 
also a f ew e xtreme sc ores o f 60 or 70 (B rown & S inclair, 1999 )1. Althoug h these sc ores mig ht r epresent 
errors, misunderstandings, or even intentional exaggerations, it is also plausible that they represent honest 
and even accurate estimates. One str ategy here would be to use the me dian and other sta tistics that are 
not strongly affected by the outliers. Another w ould be to anal yze the da ta both including and e xcluding 
any outliers. If the results are essentially the same, which the y often are, then i t makes sense to le ave the 
outliers. If the r esults differ depending on whe ther the outliers ar e included or e xcluded them, then both 
analyses can be reported and the differences between them discussed. 
Planned and Exploratory Analyses 
Finally, you are ready to answer your primary research questions. When you designed your study, you might 
have had a hypothesis that a particular relationship might exist in the data. In this case, you would conduct 
a planned analysis, to test a relationship that you expected in your hypothesis. For example, if you expected 
a difference between group or c ondition means, you can compute the r elevant group or c ondition means 
and standard deviations, make a bar graph to display the results, and compute Cohen’s d. If you expected a 
correlation between quantitative variables, you can make a line gr aph or sc atterplot (be sur e to che ck for 
nonlinearity and restriction of range) and compute Pearson’s r. 
334  |  Conducting Your AnalysesOnce you have conducted your planned analyses, you can move on to e xamine the possibility there might 
be relationships in the data that you did not hypothesize. This would be an exploratory analysis, an analysis 
that you are undertaking without an existing hypothesis. These analyses will help you explore your data for 
other interesting results that might provide the basis f or future research (and material for the discussion 
section of your paper). Daryl Bem (2003) suggests that you 
[e]xamine [your data] from every angle. Analyze the sexes separately. Make up new composite indexes. 
If a da tum suggests a ne w hypothesis, try to find addi tional evidence for it elsewhere in the da ta. If 
you see dim traces of interesting patterns, try to reorganize the data to bring them in to bolder relief. 
If there are participants you don’t like, or trials, obser vers, or in terviewers who ga ve you anomalous 
results, drop them (temporarily). Go on a fishing e xpedition for something—anything—interesting. (p. 
186–187)2 
It is impor tant to dif ferentiate planned from exploratory analyses in wri ting your results and discussion 
sections of your report. This is because  complex sets of data are likely to include “patterns” that occurred 
entirely b y chanc e, and e very time y ou do another unplanne d anal ysis on these da ta, y ou incr ease the 
likelihood these chance patterns will appear to be real patterns, what is referred to as a “ Type 1” error (see 
the chapter on I nferential Statistics). Thus r esults discovered while doing e xploratory analyses (what Bem 
calls a “fishing e xpedition”) should be vie wed skeptically and r eplicated in a t least one ne w study before 
being presented. But, if you do find interesting relationships you did not expect in the data, explain that they 
might be worthy of additional research. 
Understand Your Descriptive Statistics 
In the ne xt chapter, we will c onsider inf erential sta tistics—a se t o f te chniques f or de ciding whe ther the 
results for your sample ar e likely to appl y to the popula tion. Although inferential statistics are important 
for reasons that will be e xplained shor tly, beg inning researchers sometimes forget that their descriptiv e 
statistics r eally tell “wha t happene d” in their stud y. F or e xample, imag ine tha t a tr eatment gr oup o f 50 
participants has a me an score of 34.32 (SD = 10.45), a control group of 50 participants has a me an score of 
21.45 (SD = 9.22), and Cohen ’s d is an e xtremely strong 1.31. Althoug h conducting and r eporting inferential 
statistics (like a t test) would certainly be a r equired part of any formal report on this stud y, it should be 
clear from the descriptive statistics alone that the treatment worked. Or imag ine that a scatterplot shows 
an indistinc t “cloud” o f poin ts and P earson’s r is a trivial −. 02. Again, althoug h c onducting and r eporting 
inferential statistics would be a required part of any formal report on this study, it should be clear from the 
descriptive statistics alone that the variables are essentially unrelated. The point is that you should always 
be sure that you thoroughly understand y our results at a descriptiv e level first, and then mo ve on to the 
inferential statistics. 
Conducting Your Analyses  |  335Notes 
1. Brown, N. R., & Sinclair, R. C. (1999). Estimating number of lifetime sexual partners: Men and women do it differently. 
The Journal of Sex Research, 36, 292–297. 
2. Bem, D. J. (2003). Writing the empirical journal article. In J. M. Darley, M. P. Zanna, & H. L. Roediger III (Eds.), The 
complete academic: A career guide (2nd ed., pp. 185–219). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
336  |  Conducting Your Analyses56.  Key Takeaways and Exercises 
Key Takeaways 
• Every variable has a distribution—a way that the scores are distributed across the levels. The distribution 
can be described using a frequency table and histogram. It can also be described in words in terms of its 
shape, including whether it is unimodal or bimodal, and whether it is symmetrical or skewed. 
• The central tendency, or middle, of a distribution can be described precisely using three statistics—the 
mean, median, and mode. The mean is the sum of the scores divided by the number of scores, the median 
is the middle score, and the mode is the most common score. 
• The variability, or spread, of a distribution can be described precisely using the range and standard 
deviation. The range is the difference between the highest and lowest scores, and the standard deviation 
is the average amount by which the scores differ from the mean. 
• The location of a score within its distribution can be described using percentile ranks or z scores. The 
percentile rank of a score is the percentage of scores below that score, and the z score is the difference 
between the score and the mean divided by the standard deviation. 
• Differences between groups or conditions are typically described in terms of the means and standard 
deviations of the groups or conditions or in terms of Cohen’s d and are presented in bar graphs. 
• Cohen’s d is a measure of relationship strength (or effect size) for differences between two group or 
condition means. It is the difference of the means divided by the standard deviation. In general, values of 
±0.20, ±0.50, and ±0.80 can be considered small, medium, and large, respectively. 
• Correlations between quantitative variables are typically described in terms of Pearson’s r and presented 
in line graphs or scatterplots. 
• Pearson’s r is a measure of relationship strength (or effect size) for relationships between quantitative 
variables. It is the mean cross-product of the two sets of z scores. In general, values of ±.10, ±.30, and ±.50 
can be considered small, medium, and large, respectively. 
• In an APA-style article, simple results are most efficiently presented in the text, while more complex 
results are most efficiently presented in graphs or tables. 
• APA style includes several rules for presenting numerical results in the text. These include using words 
only for numbers less than 10 that do not represent precise statistical results, and rounding results to two 
decimal places, using words (e.g., “mean”) in the text and symbols (e.g., “M”) in parentheses. 
• APA style includes several rules for presenting results in graphs and tables. Graphs and tables should add 
information rather than repeating information, be as simple as possible, and be interpretable on their 
own with a descriptive caption (for graphs) or a descriptive title (for tables). 
• Raw data must be prepared for analysis by examining them for possible errors, organizing them, and 
entering them into a spreadsheet program. 
• Preliminary analyses on any data set include checking the reliability of measures, evaluating the 
effectiveness of any manipulations, examining the distributions of individual variables, and identifying 
outliers. 
• Outliers that appear to be the result of an error, a misunderstanding, or a lack of effort can be excluded 
from the analyses. The criteria for excluded responses or participants should be applied in the same way 
to all the data and described when you present your results. Excluded data should be set aside rather 
Key Takeaways and Exercises  |  337than destroyed or deleted in case they are needed later. 
• Descriptive statistics tell the story of what happened in a study. Although inferential statistics are also 
important, it is essential to understand the descriptive statistics first. 
Exercises 
• Practice: Make a frequency table and histogram for the following data. Then write a short description of 
the shape of the distribution in words. 
◦ 11, 8, 9, 12, 9, 10, 12, 13, 11, 13, 12, 6, 10, 17, 13, 11, 12, 12, 14, 14 
• Practice: For the data in Exercise 1, compute the mean, median, mode, standard deviation, and range. 
• Practice: Using the data in Exercises 1 and 2, find 
◦ the percentile ranks for scores of 9 and 14 
◦ the z scores for scores of 8 and 12. 
• Practice: The following data represent scores on the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale for a sample of 10 
Japanese university students and 10 American university students. (Although hypothetical, these data are 
consistent with empirical findings [Schmitt & Allik, 2005]1.) Compute the means and standard deviations 
of the two groups, make a bar graph, compute Cohen’s d, and describe the strength of the relationship in 
words. 
Japan United States 
25 27 
20 30 
24 34 
28 37 
30 26 
32 24 
21 28 
24 35 
20 33 
26 36 
• Practice: The hypothetical data that follow are extraversion scores and the number of Facebook friends 
for 15 university students. Make a scatterplot for these data, compute Pearson’s r, and describe the 
relationship in words. 
338  |  Key Takeaways and ExercisesExtraversion Facebook Friends 
8 75 
10 315 
4 28 
6 214 
12 176 
14 95 
10 120 
11 150 
4 32 
13 250 
5 99 
7 136 
8 185 
11 88 
10 144 
• Practice: In a classic study, men and women rated the importance of physical attractiveness in both a 
short-term mate and a long-term mate (Buss & Schmitt, 1993)2. The means and standard deviations are as 
follows. Men / Short Term: M = 5.67, SD = 2.34; Men / Long Term: M = 4.43, SD = 2.11; Women / Short 
Term: M = 5.67, SD = 2.48; Women / Long Term: M = 4.22, SD = 1.98. Present these results 
◦ in writing 
◦ in a figure 
◦ in a table 
• Discussion: What are at least two reasonable ways to deal with each of the following outliers based on the 
discussion in this chapter? (a) A participant estimating ordinary people’s heights estimates one woman’s 
height to be “84 inches” tall. (b) In a study of memory for ordinary objects, one participant scores 0 out of 
15. (c) In response to a question about how many “close friends” she has, one participant writes “32.” 
Notes 
1. Schmitt, D. P., & Allik, J. (2005). Simultaneous administration of the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale in 53 nations: 
Exploring the universal and culture-specific features of global self-esteem. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 89, 623–642. 
Key Takeaways and Exercises  |  339